The southern brick pyramid was constructed in the same way as the
northern one. At the side of it were also found the tombs of members of
the royal house, including that of the king Hor, already mentioned, with
its interesting contents. The remains of the mummy of this ephemeral
monarch, known only from his tomb, were also found. The entrails of the
king were placed in the usual “canopic jars,” which were sealed with the
seal of Amenemhat III; it is thus that we know that Hor died before him.
In many of the inscriptions of this king, on his coffin and stelo, a
peculiarly affected manner of writing the hieroglyphs is found,--the
birds are without their legs, the snake has no tail, the bee no head.
Birds are found without their legs in other inscriptions of this period;
it was a temporary fashion and soon discarded.

In the tomb of a princess named Nubhetep, near at hand, were found more
jewels of the same style as those of Sit-hathor and Merit. The pyramid
itself contained the usual passages and chambers, which were reached
with much difficulty and considerable tunnelling by M. de Morgan. In
fact, the search for the royal death-chambers lasted from December 5,
1894, till March 17, 1895, when the excavators’ gallery finally struck
one of the ancient passages, which were found to be unusually extensive,
contrasting in this respect with the northern pyramid. The royal
tomb-chamber had, of course, been emptied of what it contained. It must
be remembered that, in any case, it is probable that the king was not
actually buried here, but in the pyramid of Hawara.

The pyramid of Amenemhat II, which lies between the two brick pyramids,
was built entirely of stone. Nothing of it remains above ground, but the
investigation of the subterranean portions showed that it was remarkable
for the massiveness of its stones and the care with which the masonry
was executed. The same characteristics are found in the dependent tombs
of the princesses Ha and Khnumet, in which more jewelry was found. This
splendid stonework is characteristic of the Middle Kingdom; we find it
also in the temple of Mentuhetep III at Thebes.

Some distance south of Dashûr is Mêdûm, where the pyramid of Sneferu
reigns in solitude, and beyond this again is Lisht, where in the
years 1894-6 MM. Gautier and Jéquier excavated the pyramid of Usertsen
(Sen-usret) I. The most remarkable find was a cache of the seated
statues of the king in white limestone, in absolutely perfect condition.
They were found lying on their sides, just as they had been hidden. Six
figures of the king in the form of Osiris, with the face painted red,
were also found. Such figures seem to have been regularly set up in
front of a royal sepulchre; several were found in front of the funerary
temple of Mentu-hetep III, Thebes, which we shall describe later. A
fine altar of gray granite, with representations in relief of the nomes
bringing offerings, was also recovered. The pyramid of Lisht itself is
not built of bricks, like those of Dashûr, but of stone. It was not,
however, erected in so solid a fashion as those of earlier days at Gîza
or Abusîr, and nothing is left of it now but a heap of débris. The XIIth
Dynasty architects built walls of magnificent masonry, as we have
seen, and there is no doubt that the stone casing of their pyramids
was originally very fine, but the interior is of brick or rubble; the
wonderful system of building employed by kings of the IVth Dynasty at
Giza was not practised.

South of Lisht is Illahun, and at the entrance to the province of the
Fayyûm, and west of this, nearer the Fayyûm, is Hawara, where Prof.
Petrie excavated the pyramids of Usertsen (Senusret) II and Amenem-hat
III. His discoveries have already been described by Prof. Maspero in his
history, so that it will suffice here merely to compare them with the
results of M. de Morgan’s later work at Dashûr and that of MM. Gautier
and Jéquier at Lisht, to note recent conclusions in connection with
them, and to describe the newest discoveries in the same region.

Both pyramids are of brick, lined with stone, like those of Dashûr, with
some differences of internal construction, since stone walls exist in
the interior. The central chambers and passages leading to them were
discovered; and in both cases the passages are peculiarly complex, with
dumb chambers, great stone portcullises, etc., in order to mislead
and block the way to possible plunderers. The extraordinary sepulchral
chamber of the Hawara pyramid, which, though it is over twenty-two feet
long by ten feet wide over all, is hewn out of one solid block of hard
yellow quartzite, gives some idea of the remarkable facility of dealing
with huge stones and the love of utilizing them which is especially
characteristic of the XIIth Dynasty. The pyramid of Hawara was provided
with a funerary temple the like of which had never been known in Egypt
before and was never known afterwards. It was a huge building far larger
than the pyramid itself, and built of fine limestone and crystalline
white quartzite, in a style eminently characteristic of the XIIth
Dynasty. In actual superficies this temple covered an extent of ground
within which the temples of Karnak, Luxor, and the Ramesseum, at Thebes,
could have stood, but has now almost entirely disappeared, having been
used as a quarry for two thousand years. In Roman times this destroying
process had already begun, but even then the building was still
magnificent, and had been noted with wonder by all the Greek visitors to
Egypt from the time of Herodotus downwards. Even before his day it
had received the name of the “Labyrinth,” on account of its supposed
resemblance to the original labyrinth in Crete.

That the Hawara temple was the Egyptian labyrinth was pointed out by
Lepsius in the ‘forties of the last century. Within the last two or
three years attention has again been drawn to it by Mr. Arthur Evans’s
discovery of the Cretan labyrinth itself in the shape of the Minoan
or early Mycenæan palace of Knossos, near Candia in Crete. It is
impossible to enter here into all the arguments by which it has been
proved that the Knossian palace is the veritable labyrinth of the
Minotaur legend, nor would it be strictly germane to our subject were we
to do so; but it may suffice to say here that the word

[Illustration: 125.jpg (Greek word)]

has been proved to be of Greek-or rather of pre-Hellenic-origin, and
would mean in Karian “Place of the Double-Axe,” like La-braunda in
Karia, where Zeus was depicted with a double axe (labrys) in his hand.
The non-Aryan, “Asianic,” group of languages, to which certainly Lycian
and probably Karian belong, has been shown by the German philologer
Kretschmer to have spread over Greece into Italy in the period before
the Aryan Greeks entered Hellas, and to have left undoubted traces of
its presence in Greek place-names and in the Greek language itself.
Before the true Hellenes reached Crete, an Asianic dialect must have
been spoken there, and to this language the word “labyrinth” must
originally have belonged. The classical labyrinth was “in the Knossian
territory.” The palace of Knossos was emphatically the chief seat of the
worship of a god whose emblem was the double-axe; it was the Knossian
“Place of the Double-Axe,” the Cretan “Labyrinth.”

It used to be supposed that the Cretan labyrinth had taken its name from
the Egyptian one, and the, word itself was supposed to be of Egyptian
origin. An Egyptian etymology was found for it as “_Ro-pi-ro-henet_,”
 “Temple-mouth-canal,” which might be interpreted, with some violence to
Egyptian construction, as “The temple at the mouth of the canal,” i.e.
the Bahr Yusuf, which enters the Fayyûm at Hawara. But unluckily this
word would have been pronounced by the natives of the vicinity as
“Elphilahune,” which is not very much like

[Illustration: 126.jpg (Greek word)]

“_Ro-pi-ro-henet_” is, in fact, a mere figment of the philological
imagination, and cannot be proved ever to have existed. The element
_Ro-henet_, “canal-mouth” (according to the local pronunciation of the
Fayyûm and Middle Egypt, called _La-hunè_), is genuine; it is the
origin of the modern Illahun (_el-Lahun_), which is situated at the
“canal-mouth.” However, now that we know that the word labyrinth can be
explained satisfactorily with the help of Karian, as evidently of Greek
(pre-Aryan) origin, and as evidently the original name of the Knossian
labyrinth, it is obvious that there is no need to seek a far-fetched
explanation of the word in Egypt, and to suppose that the Greeks called
the Cretan labyrinth after the Egyptian one.

The contrary is evidently the case. Greek visitors to Egypt found a
resemblance between the great Egyptian building, with its numerous halls
and corridors, vast in extent, and the Knossian palace. Even if very
little of the latter was visible in the classical period, as seems
possible, yet the site seems always to have been kept holy and free from
later building till Roman times, and we know that the tradition of the
mazy halls and corridors of the labyrinth was always clear, and was
evidently based on a vivid reminiscence. Actually, one of the most
prominent characteristics of the Knossian palace is its mazy and
labyrinthine system of passages and chambers. The parallel between the
two buildings, which originally caused the Greek visitors to give the
pyramid-temple of Hawara the name of “labyrinth,” has been traced still
further. The white limestone walls and the shining portals of “Parian
marble,” described by Strabo as characteristic of the Egyptian
labyrinth, have been compared with the shining white selenite or gypsum
used at Knossos, and certain general resemblances between the Greek
architecture of the Minoan age and the almost contemporary Egyptian
architecture of the XIIth Dynasty have been pointed out.[4] Such
resemblances may go to swell the amount of evidence already known, which
tells us that there was a close connection between Egyptian and Minoan
art and civilization, established at least as early as 2500 B.C.

     [4] See H. R. Hall, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1905 (Pt.
     ii). The Temple of the Sphinx at Gîza may also be compared
     with those of Hawara and Knossos. It seems most probable
     that the Temple of the Sphinx is a XIIth Dynasty building.

For it must be remembered that within the last few years we have learned
from the excavations in Crete a new chapter of ancient history, which,
it might almost seem, shows us Greece and Egypt in regular communication
from nearly the beginnings of Egyptian history. As the excavations which
have told us this were carried on in Crete, not in Egypt, to describe
them does not lie within the scope of this book, though a short sketch
of their results, so far as they affect Egyptian history in later days,
is given in Chapter VII. Here it may suffice to say that, as far as
the early period is concerned, Egypt and Crete were certainly in
communication in the time of the XIIth Dynasty, and quite possibly in
that of the VIth or still earlier. We have IIId Dynasty Egyptian vases
from Knossos, which were certainly not imported in later days, for no
ancient nation had antiquarian tastes till the time of the Saïtes in
Egypt and of the Romans still later. In fact, this communication seems
to go so far back in time that we are gradually being led to perceive
the possibility that the Minoan culture of Greece was in its origin an
offshoot from that of primeval Egypt, probably in early Neolithic times.
That is to say, the Neolithic Greeks and Neolithic Egyptians were both
members of the same “Mediterranean” stock, which quite possibly may have
had its origin in Africa, and a portion of which may have crossed the
sea to Europe in very early times, taking with it the seeds of culture
which in Egypt developed in the Egyptian way, in Greece in the Greek
way. Actual communication and connection may not have been maintained
at first, and probably they were not. Prof. Petrie thinks otherwise, and
would see in the boats painted on the predynastic Egyptian vases (see
Chapter I) the identical galleys by which, in late Neolithic
times, commerce between Crete and Egypt was carried on across the
Mediterranean. It is certain, however, that these boats are ordinary
little river craft, the usual Nile _felûkas_ and _gyassas_ of the time;
they are depicted together with emblems of the desert and cultivated
land,-ostriches, antelopes, hills, and palm-trees,-and the thoroughly
inland and Upper Egyptian character of the whole design springs to the
eye. There can be no doubt whatever that the predynastic boats were not
seagoing galleys.

It was probably not till the time of the pyramid-builders that
connection between the Greek Mediterraneans and the Nilotes was
re-established. Thence-forward it increased, and in the time of the
XIIth Dynasty, when the labyrinth of Amenemhat III was built, there
seems to have been some kind of more or less regular communication
between the two countries.

It is certain that artistic ideas were exchanged between them at this
period. How communication was carried on we do not know, but it was
probably rather by way of Cyprus and the Syrian coast than directly
across the open sea. We shall revert to this point when we come to
describe the connection between Crete and Egypt in the time of the
XVIIIth Dynasty, when Cretan ambassadors visited the Egyptian court and
were depicted in tomb paintings at Thebes. Between the time of the XIIth
Dynasty and that of the XVIIIth this connection seems to have been very
considerably strengthened; for at Knossos have been found an Egyptian
statuette of an Egyptian named Abnub, who from his name must have lived
about the end of the XIIIth Dynasty, and the top of an alabastron with
the royal name of Khian, one of the Hyksos kings.

Quite close to Hawara, at Illahun, in the ruins of the town which was
built by Usertsen’s workmen when they were building his pyramid, Prof.
Petrie found fragments of pottery of types which we now know well from
excavations in Crete and Cyprus, though they were then unknown. They are
fragments of the polychrome Cretan ware called, after the name of the
place where it was first found in Crete, Kamares ware, and of a black
ware ornamented with small punctures, which are often filled up with
white. This latter ware has been found elsewhere associated with XIIIth
Dynasty antiquities. The former is known to belong in Crete to the
“early Minoan” period, long anterior to the “late Minoan” or “Palace”
 period, which was contemporary with the Egyptian XVIIIth Dynasty.
We have here another interesting proof of a connection between XIIth
Dynasty Egypt and early Minoan Crete. The later connection, under the
XVIIIth and following dynasties, is also illustrated in the same reign
by Prof. Petrie’s finds of late Mycenaean objects and foreign graves at
Medinet Gurob.[5]

     [5] One man who was buried here bore the name An-Tursha,
     “Pillar of the Tursha.” The Tursha were a people of the
     Mediterranean, possibly Tylissians of Crete.

These excavations at Hawara, Illahun, Kahun, and Gurob were carried out
in the years 1887-9. Since then Prof. Petrie and his co-workers have
revisited the same district, and Gurob has been re-examined (in 1904)
by Messrs. Loat and Ayrton, who discovered there a shrine devoted to
the worship of fish. This work was carried on at the same time as Prof.
Petrie’s main excavation for the Egypt Exploration Fund at Annas, or
Ahnas-yet el-Medina, the site of the ancient Henensu, the Herakleopolis
of the Greeks. Prof. Naville had excavated there for the Egypt
Exploration Fund in 1892, but had not completely cleared the temple.
This work was now taken up by Prof. Petrie, who laid the whole building
bare. It is dedicated to Hershefi, the local deity of Herakleopolis.
This god, who was called Ar-saphes by the Greeks, and identified with
Herakles, was in fact a form of Horus with the head of a ram; his name
means “Terrible-Face.” The greater part of the temple dates to the time
of the XIXth Dynasty, and nothing of the early period is left. We know,
however, that the Middle Kingdom was the flourishing period of the
city of Hershefi. For a comparatively brief period, between the age of
Memphite hegemony and that of Theban dominion, Herakleopolis was the
capital city of Egypt. The kings of the IXth and Xth Dynasties were
Herakleopolites, though we know little of them. One, Kheti, is said to
have been a great tyrant. Another, Nebkaurâ, is known only as a figure
in the “Legend of the Eloquent Peasant,” a classical story much in vogue
in later days. Another, Merikarâ, is a more real personage, for we have
contemporary records of his days in the inscriptions of the tombs at
Asyût, from which we see that the princes of Thebes were already wearing
down the Northerners, in spite of the resistance of the adherents of
Herakleopolis, among whom the most valiant were the chiefs of Asyût. The
civil war eventuated in favour of Thebes, and the Theban XIth Dynasty
assumed the double crown. The sceptre passed from Memphis and the North,
and Thebes enters upon the scene of Egyptian history.

With this event the Nile-land also entered upon a new era of
development. The metropolis of the kingdom was once more shifted to the
South, and, although the kings of the XIIth Dynasty actually resided
in the North, their Theban origin was never forgotten, and Thebes
was regarded as the chief city of the country. The XIth Dynasty kings
actually reigned at Thebes, and there the later kings of the XIIIth
Dynasty retired after the conquest of the Hyksos. The fact that with
Thebes were associated all the heroic traditions of the struggle against
the Hyksos ensured the final stability of the capital there when the
hated Semites were finally driven out, and the national kingdom
was re-established in its full extent from north to south. But for
occasional intervals, as when Akhunaten held his court at Tell el-Amarna
and Ramses II at Tanis, Thebes remained the national capital for six
hundred years, till the time of the XXIId Dynasty.

Another great change which differentiates the Middle Kingdom
(XIth-XIIIth Dynasties) from the Old Kingdom was caused by Egypt’s
coming into contact with other outside nations at this period. During
the whole history of the Old Kingdom, Egyptian relations with the outer
world had been nil. We have some inkling of occasional connection
with the Mediterranean peoples, the _Ha-nebu_ or Northerners; we have
accounts of wars with the people of Sinai and other Bedawin and negroes;
and expeditions were also sent to the land of Punt (Somaliland) by way
of the Upper Nile. But we have not the slightest hint of any connection
with, or even knowledge of, the great nations of the Euphrates valley
or the peoples of Palestine. The Babylonian king Narâm-Sin invaded the
Sinaitic peninsula (the land of Magan) as early as 3750 b. c, about
the time of the IIId Egyptian Dynasty. The great King Tjeser, of that
dynasty, also invaded Sinai, and so did Snefru, the last king of the
dynasty. But we have no hint of any collision between Babylonians and
Egyptians at that time, nor do either of them betray the slightest
knowledge of one another’s existence. It can hardly be that the two
civilized peoples of the world in those days were really absolutely
ignorant of each other, but we have no trace of any connection between
them, other than the possible one before the founding of the Egyptian
monarchy.

This early connection, however, is very problematical. We have seen that
there seems to be in early Egyptian civilization an element ultimately
of Babylonian origin, and that there are two theories as to how it
reached Egypt. One supposes that it was brought by a Semitic people of
Arab affinities (represented by the modern Grallas), who crossed the
Straits of Bab el-Man-deb and reached Egypt either by way of the Wadi
Hammamat or by the Upper Nile. The other would bring it across the
Isthmus of Suez to the Delta, where, at Heliopolis, there certainly
seems to have been a settlement of a Semitic type of very ancient
culture. In both cases we should have Semites bringing Babylonian
culture to Egypt. This, as we may remind the reader, was not itself of
Semitic origin, but was a development due to a non-Semitic people,
the Sumerians as they are called, who, so far as we know, were the
aboriginal inhabitants of Babylonia. The Sumerian language was of
agglutinative type, radically distinct both from the pure Semitic idioms
and from Egyptian. The Babylonian elements of culture which the early
Semitic invaders brought with them to Egypt were, then, ultimately of
Sumerian origin. Sumerian civilization had profoundly influenced the
Semitic tribes for centuries before the Semitic conquest of Babylonia,
and when the Sumerians became more and more a conquered race, finally
amalgamating with their conquerors and losing their racial and
linguistic individuality, they were conquered by an alien race but not
by an alien culture. For the culture of the Semites was Sumerian, the
Semitic races owing their civilization to the Sumerians. That is as
much as to say that a great deal of what we call Semitic culture is
fundamentally non-Semitic.

In the earliest days, then, Egypt received elements of Sumerian culture
through a Semitic medium, which introduced Semitic elements into the
language of the people, and a Semitic racial strain. It is possible.
that both theories as to the routes of these primeval conquerors are
true, and that two waves of Semites entered the Nile valley towards
the close of the Neolithic period, one by way of the Upper Nile or Wadi
Hammamat, the other by way of Heliopolis.

After the reconsolidation of the Egyptian people, with perhaps an
autocratic class of Semitic origin and a populace of indigenous Nilotic
race, we have no trace of further connection with the far-away centre of
Semitic culture in Babylonia till the time of the Theban hegemony.
Under the XIIth Dynasty we see Egyptians in friendly relations with the
Bedawin of Idumsea and Southern Palestine. Thus Sanehat, the younger son
of Amenemhat I, when the death of his royal father was announced, fled
from the new king Usertsen (Senusret) into Palestine, and there married
the daughter of the chief Ammuanshi and became a Syrian chief himself,
only finally returning to Egypt as an old man on the assurance of the
royal pardon and favour. We have in the reign of Usertsen (Senusret) II
the famous visit of the Arab chief Abisha (Abêshu’) with his following
to the court of Khnumhetep, the prince of the Oryx nome in Middle Egypt,
as we see it depicted on the walls of Khnumhetep’s tomb at Beni Hasan.
We see Usertsen (Senusret) III invading Palestine to chastise the land
of Sekmem and the vile Syrians.[6]

     [6] We know of this campaign from the interesting historical
     stele of the general Sebek-khu (who took part in it), which
     was found during Mr. Garstang’s excavations at Abydos, not
     previously referred to above. They were carried out in 1900,
     and resulted in the complete clearance of a part of the
     great cemetery which had been created during the XIIth
     Dynasty. The group of objects from the tombs of this
     cemetery, and those of XVIIIth Dynasty tombs also found, is
     especially valuable as showing the styles of objects in use
     at these two periods (see Garstang, el-Ardbah, 1901).

The arm of Egypt was growing longer, and its weight was being felt in
regions where it had previously been entirely unknown. Eventually the
collision came. Egypt collided with an Asiatic power, and got the worst
of the encounter. So much the worse that the Theban monarchy of the
Middle Kingdom was overthrown, and Northern Egypt was actually conquered
by the Asiatic foreigners and ruled by a foreign house for several
centuries. Who these conquering Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings, were no
recent discovery has told us. An old idea was that they were Mongols. It
was supposed that the remarkable faces of the sphinxes of Tanis, now
in the Cairo Museum, which bore the names of Hyksos kings, were of
Mongolian type, as also those of two colossal royal heads discovered
by M. Naville at Bubastis. But M. Golénischeff has now shown that these
heads are really those of XIIth Dynasty kings, and not of Hyksos at all.
Messrs. Newberry and Garstang have lately endeavoured to show that this
type was foreign, and probably connected with that of the Kheta, or
Hittites, of Northern Syria, who came into prominence as enemies of
Egypt at a later period. They think that the type was introduced into
the Egyptian royal family by Nefret, the queen of Usertsen (Senusret)
II, whom they suppose to have been a Hittite princess. At the same time
they think it probable that the type was also that of the Hyksos, whom
they consider to have been practically Hittites. They therefore revive
the theory of de Cara, which connects the Hyksos with the Hittites and
these with the Pelasgi and Tyrseni.

This is a very interesting theory, which, when carried out to its
logical conclusion, would connect the Hyksos and Hittites racially with
the pre-Hellenic “Minoan” Mycenseans of Greece, as well as with the
Etruscans of Italy. But there is little of certainty in it. It is by no
means impossible that we may eventually come to know that the Hittites
(_Kheta_, the _Khatte_ of the Assyrians) and other tribes of Asia
Minor were racially akin to the “Minoans” of Greece, but the connection
between the Hyksos and the Hittites is to seek. The countenances of the
Kheta on the Egyptian monuments of Ramses II’s time have an angular
cast, and so have those of the Tanis sphinxes, of Queen Nefret, of
the Bubastis statues, and the statues of Usertsen (Senusret) III
and Amenemhat III. We might then suppose, with Messrs. Newberry and
Garstang, that Nefret was a Kheta princess, who gave her peculiar racial
traits to her son Usertsen (Senusret) III and his son Amenem-hat, were
it not far more probable that the resemblance between this peculiar
XIIth Dynasty type and the Kheta face is purely fortuitous.

There is really no reason to suppose that the type of face presented by
Nefret, Usertsen, and Amenemhat is not purely Egyptian. It may be seen
in many a modern fellah, and the truth probably is that the sculptors
have in the case of these rulers very faithfully and carefully depicted
their portraits, and that their faces happen to have been of a rather
hard and forbidding type. But, if we grant the contention of Messrs.
Newberry and Garstang for the moment, where is the connection between
these XIIth Dynasty kings and the Hyksos? All the Tanite monuments with
this peculiar facial type which would be considered Hyksos are certainly
of the XIIth Dynasty. The only statue of a Hyksos king, which was
undoubtedly originally made for him and is not one of the XIIth Dynasty
usurped, is the small one of Khian at Cairo, discovered by M. Naville at
Bubastis, and this has no head. So that we have not the slightest idea
of what a Hyksos looked like. Moreover, the evidence of the Hyksos names
which are known to us points in quite a different direction. The Kheta,
or Hittites, were certainly not Semites, yet the Hyksos names are
definitely Semitic. In fact it is most probable that the Hyksos, or
Shepherd Kings, were, as the classical authorities say they were, and as
their name (_hiku-semut_ or _hihu-shasu_,) “princes of the deserts” or
(“princes of the Bedawîn”) also testifies, purely and simply Arabs.

Now it is not a little curious that almost at the same time that a nomad
Arab race conquered Lower Egypt and settled in it as rulers (just as
‘Amr and the followers of Islam did over two thousand years later),
another Arab race may have imposed its rule upon Babylonia. Yet this
may have been the case; for the First Dynasty of Babylon, to which the
famous Hammurabi belonged, was very probably of Arab origin, to judge by
the forms of some of the royal names. It is by no means impossible that
there was some connection between these two conquests, and that both
Babylonia and Egypt fell, in the period before the year 2000 B.C. before
some great migratory movement from Arabia, which overran Babylonia,
Palestine, and even the Egyptian Delta.

In this manner Egypt and Babylonia may have been brought together
in common subjection to the Arab. We do not know whether any regular
communication between Egypt, under Semitic rule, and Babylonia was now
established; but we do know that during the Hyksos period there were
considerable relations between Egypt and over-sea Crete, and relations
with Mesopotamia may possibly have been established. At any rate, when
the war of liberation, which was directed by the princes of Thebes, was
finally brought to a successful conclusion and the Arabs were expelled,
we find the Egyptians a much changed nation. They had adopted for war
the use of horse and chariot, which they learnt from their Semitic
conquerors, whose victory was in all probability largely gained by their
use, and, generally speaking, they had become much more like the Western
Asiatic nations. Egypt was no longer isolated, for she had been forcibly
brought into contact with the foreign world, and had learned much.
She was no longer self-contained within her own borders. If the Semites
could conquer her, so could she conquer the Semites. Armed with horse
and chariot, the Egyptians went forth to battle, and their revenge was
complete. All Palestine and Syria were Egyptian domains for five hundred
years after the conquest by Thothmes I and III, and Ashur and Babel sent
tribute to the Pharaoh of Egypt.

The reaction came, and Egypt was thrown prostrate beneath the feet of
Assyria; but her claim to dominion over the Western Asiatics was never
abandoned, and was revived in all its pomp by Ptolemy Euergetes, who
brought back in triumph to Egypt the images of the gods which had been
removed by Assyrians and Babylonians centuries before. This claim was
never allowed by the Asiatics, it is true, and their kings wrote to the
proudest Pharaoh as to an absolute equal. Even the King of Cyprus calls
the King of Egypt his brother. But Palestine was admitted to be
an Egyptian possession, and the Phoenicians were always energetic
supporters of the Egyptian régime against the lawless Bedawîn tribes,
who were constantly intriguing with the Kheta or Hittite power to the
north against Egypt.

The existence of this extra-Egyptian imperial possession meant that the
eyes of the Egyptians were now permanently turned in the direction of
Western Asia, with which they were henceforth in constant and intimate
communication. The first Theban period and the Hyksos invasion,
therefore, mark a turning-point in Egyptian history, at which we may
fitly leave it for a time in order to turn our attention to those
peoples of Western Asia with whom the Egyptians had now come into
permanent contact.

Just as new discoveries have been made in Egypt, which have modified our
previous conception of her history, so also have the excavators of
the ancient sites in the Mesopotamian valley made, during the last few
years, far-reaching discoveries, which have enabled us to add to and
revise much of our knowledge of the history of Babylonia and Assyria. In
Palestine and the Sinaitic peninsula also the spade has been used with
effect, but a detailed account of work in Sinai and Palestine falls
within the limits of a description of Biblical discoveries rather than
of this book. The following chapters will therefore deal chiefly with
modern discoveries which have told us new facts with regard to the
history of the ancient Sumerians themselves, and of the Babylonians,
Elamites, Kassites, and Assyrians, the inheritors of the ancient
Sumerian civilization, which was older than that of Egypt, and which, as
we have seen, probably contributed somewhat to its formation. These
were the two primal civilizations of the ancient world. For two thousand
years each marched upon a solitary road, without meeting the other.
Eventually the two roads converged. We have hitherto dealt with the road
of the Egyptians; we now describe that of the Mesopotamians, up to the
point of convergence.




CHAPTER IV--RECENT EXCAVATIONS IN WESTERN ASIA AND THE DAWN OF CHALDÆAN HISTORY


In the preceding pages it has been shown how recent excavations in Egypt
have revealed an entirely new chapter in the history of that country,
and how, in consequence, our theories with regard to the origin of
Egyptian civilization have been entirely remodelled. Excavations have
been and are being carried out in Mesopotamia and the adjacent countries
with no less enthusiasm and energy than in Egypt itself, and, although
it cannot be said that they have resulted in any sweeping modification
of our conceptions with regard to the origin and kinship of the early
races of Western Asia, yet they have lately added considerably to our
knowledge of the ancient history of the countries in that region of the
world. This is particularly the case in respect of the Sumerians, who,
so far as we know at present, were the earliest inhabitants of the
fertile plains of Mesopotamia. The beginnings of this ancient people
stretch back into the remote past, and their origin is still shrouded in
the mists of antiquity. When first we come across them they have already
attained a high level of civilization. They have built temples and
palaces and houses of burnt and unburnt brick, and they have reduced
their system of agriculture to a science, intersecting their country
with canals for purposes of irrigation and to ensure a good supply of
water to their cities. Their sculpture and pottery furnish abundant
evidence that they have already attained a comparatively high level in
the practice of the arts, and finally they have evolved a complicated
system of writing which originally had its origin in picture-characters,
but afterwards had been developed along phonetic lines. To have attained
to this pitch of culture argues long periods of previous development,
and we must conclude that they had been settled in Southern Babylonia
many centuries before the period to which we must assign the earliest of
their remains at present discovered.

That this people were not indigenous to Babylonia is highly probable,
but we have little data by which to determine the region from which
they originally came. Prom the fact that they built their ziggurats, or
temple towers, of huge masses of unburnt brick which rose high above
the surrounding plain, and that their ideal was to make each “like a
mountain,” it has been argued that they were a mountain race, and the
home from which they sprang has been sought in Central Asia. Other
scholars have detected signs of their origin in their language and
system of writing, and, from the fact that they spoke an agglutinative
tongue and at the earliest period arranged the characters of their
script in vertical lines like the Chinese, it has been urged that
they were of Mongol extraction. Though a case may be made out for this
hypothesis, it would be rash to dogmatize for or against it, and it is
wiser to await the discovery of further material on which a more certain
decision may be based. But whatever their origin, it is certain that the
Sumerians exercised an extraordinary influence on all races with
which, either directly or indirectly, they came in contact. The ancient
inhabitants of Elam at a very early period adopted in principle
their method of writing, and afterwards, living in isolation in the
mountainous districts of Persia, developed it on lines of their own. [*
See Chap. V, and note.] On their invasion of Babylonia the Semites
fell absolutely under Sumerian influence, and, although they eventually
conquered and absorbed the Sumerians, their civilization remained
Sumerian to the core. Moreover, by means of the Semitic inhabitants of
Babylonia Sumerian culture continued to exert its influence on other
and more distant races. We have already seen how a Babylonian element
probably enters into Egyptian civilization through Semitic infiltration
across the Straits of Bab el-Mandeb or by way of the Isthmus of Suez,
and it was Sumerian culture which these Semites brought with them.
In like manner, through the Semitic Babylonians, the Assyrians, the
Kassites, and the inhabitants of Palestine and Syria, and of some
parts of Asia Minor, Armenia, and Kurdistan, all in turn experienced
indirectly the influence of Sumerian civilization and continued in a
greater or less degree to reproduce elements of this early culture.

It will be seen that the influence of the Sumerians furnishes us with
a key to much that would otherwise prove puzzling in the history of the
early races of Western Asia. It is therefore all the more striking to
recall the fact that but a few years ago the very existence of this
ancient people was called in question. At that time the excavations in
Mesopotamia had not revealed many traces of the race itself, and its
previous existence had been mainly inferred from a number of Sumerian
compositions inscribed upon Assyrian tablets found in the library
of Ashur-bani-pal at Nineveh. These compositions were furnished with
Assyrian translations upon the tablets on which they were inscribed,
and it was correctly argued by the late Sir Henry Rawlinson, the late M.
Oppert, Prof. Schrader, Prof. Sayce, and other scholars that they were
written in the language of the earlier inhabitants of the country whom
the Semitic Babylonians had displaced. But M. Halévy started a theory to
the effect that Sumerian was not a language at all, in the proper sense
of the term, but was a cabalistic method of writing invented by the
Semitic Babylonian priests.

[Illustration: 147.jpg LIST OF ARCHAIC CUNEIFORM SIGNS.

     Drawn up by an Assyrian scribe to assist him in his studies
     of early texts. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The argument on which the upholders of this theory mainly relied was
that many of the phonetic values of the Sumerian signs were obviously
derived from Semitic equivalents, and they hastily jumped to the
conclusion that the whole language was similarly derived from Semitic
Babylonian, and was, in fact, a purely arbitrary invention of the
Babylonian priests. This theory ignored all questions of inherent
probability, and did not attempt to explain why the Babylonian priests
should have troubled themselves to make such an invention and afterwards
have stultified themselves by carefully appending Assyrian translations
to the majority of the Sumerian compositions which they copied out.
Moreover, the nature of these compositions is not such as we should
expect to find recorded in a cabalistic method of writing. They contain
no secret lore of the Babylonian priests, but are merely hymns and
prayers and religious compositions similar to those employed by the
Babylonians and Assyrians themselves.

But in spite of its inherent improbabilities, M. Halévy succeeded in
making many converts to his theory, including Prof. Friedrich Delitzsch
and a number of the younger school of German Assyriologists. More
conservative scholars, such as Sir Henry Rawlinson, M. Oppert, and Prof.
Schrader, stoutly opposed the theory, maintaining that Sumerian was a
real language and had been spoken by an earlier race whom the Semitic
Babylonians had conquered; and they explained the resemblance of some of
the Sumerian values to Semitic roots by supposing that Sumerian had
not been suddenly superseded by the language of the Semitic invaders
of Babylonia, but that the two tongues had been spoken for long periods
side by side and that each had been strongly influenced by the other.
This very probable and sane explanation has been fully corroborated
by subsequent excavations, particularly those that were carried out at
Telloh in Southern Babylonia by the late M. de Sarzec. In these mounds,
which mark the site of the ancient Sumerian city of Shirpurla, were
found thousands of clay tablets inscribed in archaic characters and in
the Sumerian language, proving that it had actually been the language of
the early inhabitants of Babylonia; while the examples of their art and
the representations of their form and features, which were also afforded
by the diggings at Telloh, proved once for all that the Sumerians were
a race of strongly marked characteristics and could not be ascribed to a
Semitic stock.

The system of writing invented by the ancient Sumerians was adopted by
the Semitic Babylonians, who modified it to suit their own language.
Moreover, the archaic forms of the characters, many of which under the
Sumerians still retained resemblances to the pictures of objects from
which they were descended, were considerably changed. The lines, of
which they were originally composed, gave way to wedges, and the number
of the wedges of which each sign consisted was gradually diminished, so
that in the time of the Assyrians and the later Babylonians many of the
characters bore small resemblance to the ancient Sumerian forms
from which they had been derived. The reading of Sumerian and early
Babylonian inscriptions by the late Assyrian scribes was therefore an
accomplishment only to be acquired as the result of long study, and it
is interesting to note that as an assistance to the reading of these
early texts the scribes compiled lists of archaic signs. Sometimes
opposite each archaic character they drew a picture of the object from
which they imagined it was derived. This fact is significant as proving
that the Assyrian scribes recognized the pictorial origin of cuneiform
writing, but the pictures they drew opposite the signs are rather
fanciful, and it cannot be said that their guesses were very successful.
That we are able to criticize the theories of the Assyrians as to the
origin and forms of the early characters is in the main due to M. de
Sarzec’s labours, from whose excavations many thousands of inscriptions
of the Sumerians have been recovered.

The main results of M. de Sarzec’s diggings at Telloh have already been
described by M. Maspero in his history, and therefore we need not go
over them again, but will here confine ourselves to the results which
have been obtained from recent excavations at Telloh and at other sites
in Western Asia. With the death of M. de Sarzec, which occurred in his
sixty-fifth year, on May 31, 1901, the wonderfully successful series of
excavations which he had carried out at Telloh was brought to an end. In
consequence it was feared at the time that the French diggings on this
site might be interrupted for a considerable period. Such an event would
have been regretted by all those who are interested in the early history
of the East, for, in spite of the treasures found by M. de Sarzec in the
course of his various campaigns, it was obvious that the site was far
from being exhausted, and that the tells as yet unexplored contained
inscriptions and antiquities extending back to the very earliest periods
of Sumerian history.

[Illustration: 150.jpg FRAGMENT OF A LIST OF ARCHAIC CUNEIFORM SIGNS.]

     Opposite each the scribe has drawn a picture of the object
     from which he imagined it was derived. Photograph by Messrs.
     Mansell & Co.

The announcement which was made in 1902, that the French government had
appointed Capt. Gaston Cros as the late M. de Sarzec’s successor, was
therefore received with general satisfaction. The fact that Capt. Cros
had already successfully carried out several difficult topographical
missions in the region of the Sahara was a sufficient guarantee that the
new diggings would be conducted on a systematic and exhaustive scale.

The new director of the French mission in Chaldæa arrived at Telloh in
January, 1903, and one of his first acts was to shift the site of the
mission’s settlement from the bank of the Shatt el-Hai, where it had
always been established in the time of M. de Sarzec, to the mounds where
the actual digging took place. The Shatt el-Hai had been previously
chosen as the site of the settlement to ensure a constant supply of
water, and as it was more easily protected against attack by night.
But the fact that it was an hour’s ride from the diggings caused an
unnecessary loss of time, and rendered the strict supervision of the
diggers a matter of considerable difficulty. During the first season’s
work rough huts of reeds, surrounded by a wall of earth and a ditch,
served the new expedition for its encampment among the mounds of Telloh,
but last year these makeshift arrangements were superseded by a regular
house built out of the burnt bricks which are found in abundance on the
site. A reservoir has also been built, and caravans of asses bring water
in skins from the Shatt el-Hai to keep it filled with a constant supply
of water, while the excellent relations which Capt. Cros has established
with the Karagul Arabs, who occupy Telloh and its neighbourhood, have
proved to be the best kind of protection for the mission engaged in
scientific work upon the site.

The group of mounds and hillocks, known as Telloh, which marks the site
of the ancient Sumerian city of Shirpurla, is easily distinguished from
the flat surrounding desert. The mounds extend in a rough oval formation
running north and south, about two and a half miles long and one and a
quarter broad. In the early spring, when the desert is covered with a
light green verdure, the ruins are clearly marked out as a yellow spot
in the surrounding green, for vegetation does not grow upon them. In the
centre of this oval, which approximately marks the limits of the ancient
city and its suburbs, are four large tells or mounds running, roughly,
north and south, their sides descending steeply on the east, but with
their western slopes rising by easier undulations from the plain. These
four principal tells are known as the “Palace Tell,” the “Tell of the
Fruit-house,” the “Tell of the Tablets,” and the “Great Tell,” and,
rising as they do in the centre of the site, they mark the position of
the temples and the other principal buildings of the city.

An indication of the richness of the site in antiquities was afforded
to the new mission before it had started regular excavation and while
it was yet engaged in levelling its encampment and surrounding it with a
wall and ditch. The spot selected for the camp was a small mound to the
south of the site of Telloh, and here, in the course of preparing the
site for the encampment and digging the ditch, objects were found at
a depth of less than a foot beneath the surface of the soil. These
included daggers, copper vases, seal-cylinders, rings of lapis and
cornelian, and pottery. M. de Sarzec had carried out his latest
diggings in the Tell of the Tablets, and here Capt. Cros continued
the excavations and came upon the remains of buildings and recovered
numerous objects, dating principally from the period of Gudea and
the kings of Ur. The finds included small terra-cotta figures, a
boundary-stone of Gamil-Sin, and a new statue of Gudea, to which we will
refer again presently.

In the Tell of the Fruit-house M. de Sarzec had already discovered
numbers of monuments dating from the earlier periods of Sumerian history
before the conquest and consolidation of Babylonia under Sargon of
Agade, and had excavated a primitive terrace built by the early king
Ur-Ninâ. Both on and around this large mound Capt. Cros cut an extensive
series of trenches, and in digging to the north of the mound he found a
number of objects, including an alabaster tablet of Ente-mena which had
been blackened by fire. At the foot of the tell he found a copper helmet
like those represented on the famous Stele of Vultures discovered by
M. de Sarzec, and among the tablets here recovered was one with an
inscription of the time of Urukagina, which records the complete
destruction of the city of Shirpurla during his reign, and will be
described in greater detail later on in this chapter. On the mound
itself a considerable area was uncovered with remains of buildings
still in place, the use of which appears to have been of an industrial
character. They included flights of steps, canals with raised banks,
and basins for storing water. Not far off are the previously discovered
wells of Bannadu, so that it is legitimate to suppose that Capt. Cros
has here come upon part of the works which were erected at a very early
period of Sumerian history for the distribution of water to this portion
of the city.

[Illustration: 154.jpg Obelisk of Manishtusu.]

     An early Semitic king of the city of Kish in Babylonia. The
     photograph is taken from M. de Morgan’s _Délégation en Perse,
     Mém_., t. i, pi. ix.

In the Palace Tell Capt. Cros has sunk a series of deep shafts to
determine precisely the relations which the buildings of Ur-Bau and
Gudea, found already on this part of the site, bear to each other, and
to the building of Adad-nadin-akhê, which had been erected there at
a much later period. Prom this slight sketch of the work carried out
during the last two years at Telloh it will have been seen that the
Prench mission in Chaldæa is at present engaged in excavations of a
most important character, which are being conducted in a regular and
scientific manner. As the area of the excavations marks the site of the
chief city of the Sumerians, the diggings there have yielded and
are yielding material of the greatest interest and value for the
reconstruction of the early history of Chaldæa. After briefly describing
the character and results of other recent excavations in Mesopotamia and
the neighbouring lands, we will return to the discoveries at Telloh and
sketch the new information they supply on the history of the earliest
inhabitants of the country.

Another French mission that is carrying out work of the very greatest
interest to the student of early Babylonian history is that which is
excavating at Susa in Persia, under the direction of M. J. de Morgan,
whose work on the prehistoric and early dynastic sites in Egypt has
already been described. M. de Morgan’s first season’s digging at Susa
was carried out in the years 1897-8, and the success with which he met
from the very first, when cutting trenches in the mound which marks
the acropolis of the ancient city, has led him to concentrate his main
efforts in this part of the ruins ever since. Provisional trenches cut
in the part of the ruins called “the Royal City,” and in others of the
mounds at Susa, indicate that many remains may eventually be found there
dating from the period of the Achæmenian Kings of Persia. But it is in
the mound of the acropolis at Susa that M. de Morgan has found monuments
of the greatest historical interest and value, not only in the history
of ancient Elam, but also in that of the earliest rulers of Chaldæa.

In the diggings carried out during the first season’s work on the site,
an obelisk was found inscribed on four sides with a long text of some
sixty-nine columns, written in Semitic Babylonian by the orders
of Manishtusu, a very early Semitic king of the city of Kish in
Babylonia.[* See illustration.] The text records the purchase by the
King of Kish of immense tracts of land situated at Kish and in
its neighbourhood, and its length is explained by the fact that it
enumerates full details of the size and position of each estate, and the
numbers and some of the names of the dwellers on the estates who were
engaged in their cultivation. After details have been given of a number
of estates situated in the same neighbourhood, a summary is appended
referring to the whole neighbourhood, and the fact is recorded that the
district dealt with in the preceding catalogue and summary had been duly
acquired by purchase by Manishtusu, King of Kish. The long text upon
the obelisk is entirely taken up with details of the purchase of the
territory, and therefore its subject has not any great historical value.
Mention is made in it of two personages, one of whom may possibly
be identified with a Babylonian ruler whose name is known from other
sources. If the proposed identification t should prove to be correct,
it would enable us to assign a more precise date to Manishtusu than has
hitherto been possible. One of the personages in question was a certain
Urukagina, the son of Engilsa, patesi of Shirpurla, and it has been
suggested that he is the same Urukagina who is known to have occupied
the throne of Shirpurla, though this identification would bring
Manishtusu down somewhat later than is probable from the general
character of his inscriptions. The other personage mentioned in the text
is the son of Manishtusu, named Mesalim, and there is more to be said
for the identification of this prince with Mesilim, the early King of
Kish, who reigned at a period anterior to that of Eannadu, patesi of
Shirpurla.

The mere fact of so large and important an obelisk, inscribed with a
Semitic text by an early Babylonian king, being found at Susa was
an indication that other monuments of even greater interest might be
forthcoming from the same spot; and this impression was intensified when
a stele of victory was found bearing an inscription of Naram-Sin, the
early Semitic King of Agade, who reigned about 3750 B.C. One face of
this stele is sculptured with a representation of the king conquering
his enemies in a mountainous country. [* See illustration.] The king
himself wears a helmet adorned with the horns of a bull, and he carries
his battle-axe and his bow and an arrow. He is nearly at the summit of
a high mountain, and up its steep sides, along paths through the
trees which clothe the mountain, climb his allies and warriors bearing
standards and weapons. The king’s enemies are represented suing for
mercy as they turn to fly before him. One grasps a broken spear, while
another, crouching before the king, has been smitten in the throat by an
arrow from the king’s bow. On the plain surface of the stele above the
king’s head may be seen traces of an inscription of Narâm-Sin engraved
in three columns in the archaic characters of his period. From the few
signs of the text that remain, we gather that Narâm-Sin had conducted
a campaign with the assistance of certain allied princes, including the
Princes of Sidur, Saluni, and Lulubi, and it is not improbable that
they are to be identified with the warriors represented on the stele as
climbing the mountain behind Narâm-Sin.

In reference to this most interesting stele of Narâm-Sin we may here
mention another inscription of this king, found quite recently at
Susa and published only this year, which throws additional light on
Narâm-Sin’s allies and on the empire which he and his father Sargon
founded. The new inscription was engraved on the base of a diorite
statue, which had been broken to pieces so that only the base with
a portion of the text remained. From this inscription we learn that
Narâm-Sin was the head of a confederation of nine chief allies, or
vassal princes, and waged war on his enemies with their assistance.
Among these nine allies of course the Princes of Sidur, Saluni, and
Lulubi are to be included. The new text further records that Narâm-Sin
made an expedition against Magan (the Sinaitic peninsula), and defeated
Manium, the lord of that region, and that he cut blocks of stone in the
mountains there and transported them to his city of Agade, where
from one of them he made the statue on the base of which the text was
inscribed. It was already known from the so-called “Omens of Sargon
and Narâm-Sin” (a text inscribed on a clay tablet from Ashur-bani-pal’s
library at Nineveh which associates the deeds of these two early rulers
with certain augural phenomena) that Narâm-Sin had made an expedition
to Sinai in the course of his reign and had conquered the king of the
country. The new text gives contemporary confirmation of this assertion
and furnishes us with additional information with regard to the name of
the conquered ruler of Sinai and other details of the campaign.

That monuments of such great interest to the early history of Chaldæa
should have been found at Susa in Persia was sufficiently startling,
but an easy explanation was at first forthcoming from the fact that
Narâm-Sin’s stele of victory had been used by the later Elamite king,
Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, for an inscription of his own; this he had engraved
in seven long lines along the great cone in front of Narâm-Sin, which is
probably intended to represent the peak of the mountain. From the fact
that it had been used in this way by Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, it seemed
permissible to infer that it had been captured in the course of a
campaign and brought to Susa as a trophy of war. But we shall see later
on that the existence of early Babylonian inscriptions and monuments in
the mound of the acropolis at Susa is not to be explained in this way,
but was due to the wide extension of both Sumerian and Semitic influence
throughout Western Asia from the very earliest periods. This subject
will be treated more fully in the chapter dealing with the early history
of Blam.

The upper surface of the tell of the acropolis at Susa for a depth of
nearly two metres contains remains of the buildings and antiquities
of the Achæmenian kings and others of both later and earlier dates.
In these upper strata of the mound are found remains of the
Arab, Sassanian, Parthian, Seleucian, and Persian periods, mixed
indiscriminately with one another and with Elamite objects and materials
of all ages, from that of the earliest patesis down to that of the
Susian kings of the seventh century B.C.

[Illustration: 160.jpg BABIL.]

     The most northern of the mounds which now mark the site of
     the ancient city of Babylon; used for centuries as a quarry
     for building materials.

The reason of this mixture of the remains of many races and periods is
that the later builders on the mound made use of the earlier building
materials which they found preserved within it. Along the skirts of the
mound may still be seen the foundations of the wall which formed the
principal defence of the acropolis in the time of Xerxes, and in many
places not only are the foundations preserved but large pieces of the
wall itself still rise above the surface of the soil.

[Illustration: 160a.jpg “STELE OF VICTORY”]

[Illustration: 160a-text.jpg TEXT FOR “STELE OF VICTORY”]

     Stele of Narâm-Sin, an early Semitic King of Agade in
     Babylonia, who reigned about B. C. 3750. From the photograph
     by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The plan of the wall is quite irregular, following the contours of the
mound, and, though it is probable that the wall was strengthened and
defended at intervals by towers, no trace of these now remains. The
wall is very thick and built of unburnt bricks, and the system of
fortification seems to have been extremely simple at this period.



[Illustration: 161.jpg ROUGHLY HEWN SCULPTURE OF A LION STANDING OVER A
FALLEN MAN, FOUND AT BABYLON.]

     The group probably represents Babylon or the Babylonian king
     triumphing over the country’s enemies. The Arabs regard the
     figure as an evil spirit, and it is pitted with the marks of
     bullets shot at it. They also smear it with filth when they
     can do so unobserved; in the photograph some newly smeared
     filth may be seen adhering to the side of the lion.

The earlier citadel or fortress of the city of Susa was built at the top
of the mound and must have been a more formidable stronghold than that
of the Achæmenian kings, for, besides its walls, it had the additional
protection of the steep slopes of the mound.

Below the depth of two metres from the surface of the mound are found
strata in which Elamite objects and materials are, no longer mixed with
the remains of later ages, but here the latest Elamite remains are found
mingled with objects and materials dating from the earliest periods of
Elam’s history. The use of un-burnt bricks as the principal material
for buildings erected on the mound in all ages has been another cause
of this mixture of materials, for it has little power of resistance to
water, and a considerable rain-storm will wash away large portions
of the surface and cause the remains of different strata to be mixed
indiscriminately with one another. In proportion as the trenches were
cut deeper into the mound the strata which were laid bare showed remains
of earlier ages than those in the upper layers, though here also remains
of different periods are considerably mixed. The only building that has
hitherto been discovered at Susa by M. de Morgan, the ground plan of
which was in a comparatively good state of preservation, was a small
temple of the god Shu-shinak, and this owed its preservation to the
fact that it was not built of unburnt brick, but was largely composed of
burnt brick and plaques and tiles of enamelled terra-cotta.

But although the diggings of M. de Morgan at Susa have so far afforded
little information on the subject of Elamite architecture, the separate
objects found have enabled us to gain considerable knowledge of the
artistic achievements of the race during the different periods of
its existence. Moreover, the stelæ and stone records that have been
recovered present a wealth of material for the study of the long history
of Elam and of the kings who ruled in Babylonia during the earliest
ages.

[Illustration: 163.jpg GENERAL VIEW OF THE EXCAVATIONS ON THE KASR AT
BABYLON.]

     Showing the depth in the mound to which the diggings are
     carried.

The most famous of M. de Morgan’s recent finds is the long code of
laws drawn up by Hammurabi, the greatest king of the First Dynasty of
Babylon.[1] This was engraved upon a huge block of black diorite, and
was found in the tell of the acropolis in the winter of 1901-2. This
document in itself has entirely revolutionized current theories as to
the growth and origin of the principal ancient legal codes. It proves
that Babylonia was the fountainhead from which many later races borrowed
portions of their legislative systems. Moreover, the subjects dealt
with in this code of laws embrace most of the different classes of the
Babylonian people, and it regulates their duties and their relations
to one another in their ordinary occupations and pursuits. It therefore
throws much light upon early Babylonian life and customs, and we shall
return to it in the chapter dealing with these subjects.

     [1] It will be noted that the Babylonian dynasties are
     referred to throughout this volume as “First Dynasty,”
      “Second Dynasty,” “Third Dynasty,” etc. They are thus
     distinguished from the Egyptian dynasties, the order of
     which is indicated by Roman numerals, e.g. “Ist Dynasty,”
      “IId Dynasty,” “IIId Dynasty.”

The American excavators at Nippur, under the direction of Mr. Haynes,
have done much in the past to increase our knowledge of Sumerian and
early Babylonian history, but the work has not been continued in
recent years, and, unfortunately, little progress has been made in the
publication of the material already accumulated. In fact, the leadership
in American excavation has passed from the University of Pennsylvania to
that of Chicago. This progressive university has sent out an expedition,
under the general direction of Prof. R. F. Harper (with Dr. E. J. Banks
as director of excavations), which is doing excellent work at Bismya,
and, although it is too early yet to expect detailed accounts of their
achievements, it is clear that they have already met with considerable
success. One of their recent finds consists of a white marble statue of
an early Sumerian king named Daudu, which was set up in the temple of
E-shar in the city of Udnun, of which he was ruler. From its archaic
style of workmanship it may be placed in the earliest period of Sumerian
history, and may be regarded as an earnest of what may be expected to
follow from the future labours of Prof. Harper’s expedition.

[Illustration: 165.jpg WITHIN THE PALACE OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR II.]

At Fâra and at Abû Hatab in Babylonia, the Deutsch-Orient Gesellschaft,
under Dr. Koldewey’s direction, has excavated Sumerian and Babylonian
remains of the early period. At the former site they unearthed the
remains of many private houses and found some Sumerian tablets of
accounts and commercial documents, but little of historical interest;
and an inscription, which seems to have come from Abu Hatab, probably
proves that the Sumerian name of the city whose site it marks was
Kishurra. But the main centre of German activity in Babylonia is the
city of Babylon itself, where for the last seven years Dr. Koldewey has
conducted excavations, unearthing the palaces of Nebuchadnezzar II on
the mound termed the Kasr, identifying the temple of E-sagila under the
mound called Tell Amran ibn-Ali, tracing the course of the sacred way
between E-sagila and the palace-mound, and excavating temples dedicated
to the goddess Ninmakh and the god Ninib.

[Illustration: 166.jpg EXCAVATIONS IN THE TEMPLE OP NINIB AT BABYLON.]

     In the middle distance may be seen the metal trucks running
     on light rails which are employed on the work for the
     removal of the débris from the diggings.

Dr. Andrae, Dr. Koldewey’s assistant, has also completed the excavation
of the temple dedicated to Nabû at Birs Nimrud. On the principal mound
at this spot, which marks the site of the ancient city of Borsippa,
traces of the ziggurat, or temple tower, may still be seen rising from
the soil, the temple of Nabû lying at a lower level below the steep
slope of the mound, which is mainly made up of débris from the
ziggurat. Dr. Andrae has recently left Babylonia for Assyria, where
his excavations at Sher-ghat, the site of the ancient Assyrian city of
Ashur, are confidently expected to throw considerable light on the early
history of that country and the customs of the people, and already he
has made numerous finds of considerable interest.

[Illustration: 167.jpg THE PRINCIPAL MOUND OF BIRS NIMRUD, WHICH MARKS
THE SITE OP THE ANCIENT CITY OP BORSIPPA.]

Since the early spring of 1903 excavations have been conducted at
Kuyunjik, the site of the city of Nineveh, by Messrs. L. W. King and R.
C. Thompson on behalf of the Trustees of the British Museum, and have
resulted in the discovery of many early remains in the lower strata of
the mound, in addition to the finding of new portions of the two palaces
already known and partly excavated, the identification of a third
palace, and the finding of an ancient temple dedicated to Nabû, whose
existence had already been inferred from a study of the Assyrian
inscriptions.[2] All these diggings at Babylon, at Ashur, and at Nineveh
throw more light upon the history of the country during the Assyrian and
Neo-Babylonian periods, and will be referred to later in the volume.

     [2] It may be noted that excavations are also being actively
     carried on in Palestine at the present time. Mr. Macalister
     has for some years been working for the Palestine
     Exploration Fund at Gezer; Dr. Schumacher is digging at
     Megiddo for the German Palestine Society; and Prof. Sellin
     is at present excavating at Taanach (Ta’annak) and will
     shortly start work at Dothan. Good work on remains of later
     historical periods is also being carried on under the
     auspices of the Deutsch-Orient Gesellschaft at Ba’albek and
     in Galilee. It would be tempting to include here a summary
     of the very interesting results that have recently been
     achieved in this fruitful field of archaeological research,
     for it is true that these excavations may strictly be said
     to bear on the history of a portion of Western Asia. But the
     problems which they raise would more naturally be discussed
     in a work dealing with recent excavation and research in
     relation to the Bible, and to have summarized them
     adequately would have increased the size of the present
     volume considerably beyond its natural limits. They have
     therefore not been included within the scope of the present
     work.

[Illustration: 168.jpg THE PRINCIPAL MOUND AT SHERGHAT, WHICH MARKS THE
SITE OF ASHUK, THE ANCIENT CAPITAL OF THE ASSYRIANS.]

Meanwhile, we will return to the diggings described at the beginning
of this chapter, as affording new information concerning the earliest
periods of Chaldæan history.

A most interesting inscription has recently been discovered by Capt.
Cros at Telloh, which throws considerable light on the rivalry which
existed between the cities of Shirpurla and Gishkhu, and at the same
time furnishes valuable material for settling the chronology of the
earliest rulers whose inscriptions have been found at Mppur and their
relations to contemporary rulers in Shirpurla.

[Illustration: 169.jpg THE MOUND OF KUYUNJIK, WHICH FORMED ONE OF THE
PALACE MOUNDS OF THE ANCIENT ASSYRIAN CITY OF NINEVEH.]

The cities of Gishkhu and Shirpurla were probably situated not far from
one another, and their rivalry is typical of the history of the early
city-states of Babylonia. The site of the latter city, as has already
been said, is marked by the mounds of Telloh on the east bank of the
Shatt el-Hai, the natural stream joining the Tigris and Euphrates, which
has been improved and canalized by the dwellers in Southern Babylonia
from the earliest period.

[Illustration: 170.jpg WINGED BULL IN THE PALACE OF SENNACHERIB ON
KUYUNJIK, THE PRINCIPAL MOUND MARKING THE SITE OF NINEVEH.]

The site of Gishkhu may be set with considerable probability not far to
the north of Telloh on the opposite bank of the Shatt el-Hai. These
two cities, situated so close to one another, exercised considerable
political influence, and though less is known of Gishkhu than of
the more famous Babylonian cities such as Ur, Brech, and Larsam, her
proximity to Shirpurla gave her an importance which she might not
otherwise have possessed. The earliest knowledge we possess of the
relations existing between Gishkhu and Shirpurla refers to the reign of
Mesilim, King of Kish, the period of whose rule may be provisionally set
before that of Sargon of Agade, i.e, about 4000 B.C.

At this period there was rivalry between the two cities, in consequence
of which Mesilim, King of Kish, was called in as arbitrator. A record of
the treaty of delimitation that was drawn up on this occasion has been
preserved upon the recently discovered cone of Entemena. This document
tells us that at the command of the god Enlil, described as “the king
of the countries,” Ningirsu, the chief god of Shirpurla, and the god of
Gishkhu decided to draw up a line of division between their respective
territories, and that Mesilim, King of Kish, acting under the direction
of his own god Kadi, marked out the frontier and set up a stele between
the two territories to commemorate the fixing of the boundary.

This policy of fixing the boundary by arbitration seems to have been
successful, and to have secured peace between Shirpurla and Gishkhu
for some generations. But after a period which cannot be accurately
determined a certain patesi of Gishkhu, named Ush, was filled with
ambition to extend his territory at the expense of Shirpurla. He
therefore removed the stele which Mesilim had set up, and, invading the
plain of Shirpurla, succeeded in conquering and holding a district named
Gu-edin. But Ush’s successful raid was not of any permanent benefit to
his city, for he was in his turn defeated by the forces of Shirpurla,
and his successor upon the throne, a patesi named Enakalli, abandoned a
policy of aggression, and concluded with Eannadu, patesi of Shirpurla, a
solemn treaty concerning the boundary between their realms, the text of
which has been preserved to us upon the famous Stele of Vultures in the
Louvre.[3]

     [3] A fragment of this stele is also preserved in the British
     Museum. It is published in Cuneiform Texts in the British
     Museum, Pt. vii.

According to this treaty Gu-edin was restored to Shirpurla, and a deep
ditch was dug between the two territories which should permanently
indicate the line of demarcation. The stele of Mesilim was restored to
its place, and a second stele was inscribed and set up as a memorial
of the new treaty. Enakalli did not negotiate the treaty on equal terms
with Eannadu, for he only secured its ratification by consenting to pay
heavy tribute in grain for the supply of the great temples of Nin-girsu
and Ninâ in Shirpurla. It would appear that under Eannadu the power
and influence of Shirpurla were extended over the whole of Southern
Babylonia, and reached even to the borders of Elam. At any rate, it is
clear that during his lifetime the city of Gishkhu was content to remain
in a state of subjection to its more powerful neighbour. But it was
always ready to seize any opportunity of asserting itself and of
attempting to regain its independence.

[Illustration: 172.jpg CLAY MEMORIAL-TABLET OF EANNADU.]

     The characters of the inscription well illustrate the
     pictorial origin of the Sumerian system of writing.
     Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

Accordingly, after Eannadu’s death the men of Gishkhu again took the
offensive. At this time Urlumma, the son and successor of Enakalli, was
on the throne of Gishkhu, and he organized the forces of the city
and led them out to battle. His first act was to destroy the frontier
ditches named after Ningirsu and Ninâ, the principal god and goddess of
Shirpurla, which Eannadu, the powerful foe of Gishkhu, had caused to be
dug. He then tore down the stele on which the terms of Eannadu’s treaty
had been engraved and broke it into pieces by casting it into the fire,
and the shrines which Eannadu had built near the frontier, and had
consecrated to the gods of Shirpurla, he razed to the ground. But
again Shirpurla in the end proved too strong for Gishkhu. The ruler
in Shirpurla at this time was Enannadu, who had succeeded his brother
Eannadu upon the throne. He marched out to meet the invading forces
of the men of Gishkhu, and a battle was fought in the territory of
Shirpurla. According to one account, the forces of Shirpurla were
victorious, while on the cone of Ente-mena no mention is made of
the issue of the combat. The result may not have been decisive, but
Enannadu’s action at least checked Urlumma’s encroachments for the time.

It would appear that the death of the reigning patesi in Shirpurla was
always the signal for an attack upon that city by the men of Gishkhu.
They may have hoped that the new ruler would prove a less successful
leader than the last, or that the accession of a new monarch might give
rise to internal dissensions in the city which would weaken Shirpurla’s
power of resisting a sudden attack. As Eannadu’s death had encouraged
Urlumma to lead out the men of Gishkhu, so the death of Enannadu seemed
to him a good opportunity to make another bid for victory. But this time
the result of the battle was not indecisive. Entemena had succeeded his
father Enannadu, and he led out to victory the forces of Shir-purla. The
battle was fought near the canal Lumma-girnun-ta, and when the men of
Gishkhu were put to flight they left sixty of their fellows lying dead
upon the banks of the canal. Entemena tells us that the bones of these
warriors were left to bleach in the open plain, but he seems to have
buried those of the men of Gishkhu who fell in the pursuit, for he
records that in five separate places he piled up burial-mounds in which
the bodies of the slain were interred. Entemena was not content with
merely inflicting a defeat upon the army of Gishkhu and driving it back
within its own borders, for he followed up his initial advantage and
captured the capital itself. He deposed and imprisoned Urlumma, and
chose one of his own adherents to rule as patesi of Gishkhu in his
stead. The man he appointed for this high office was named Hi, and he
had up to that time been priest in Ninâb. Entemena summoned him to his
presence, and, after marching in a triumphal procession from Girsu
in the neighbourhood of Shirpurla to the conquered city, proceeded to
invest him with the office of patesi of Gishkhu.

Entemena also repaired the frontier ditches named after Ningirsu and
Ninâ, which had been employed for purposes of irrigation as well as for
marking the frontier; and he gave instructions to Hi to employ the men
dwelling in the district of Karkar on this work, as a punishment for
the active part they had taken in the recent raid into the territory of
Shirpurla. Entemena also restored and extended the system of canals
in the region between the Tigris and the Euphrates, lining one of the
principal channels with stone.

[Illustration: 175.jpg MARBLE GATE]

     Marble Gate-Socket Bearing An Inscription Of Entemena, A Powerful
     Patesi, Or Viceroy, Of Shirpurla.
     In the photograph the gate-socket is resting on its side so as to
     show the inscription, but when in use it was set flat upon the
     ground and partly buried below the level of the pavement of the
     building in which it was used. It was fixed at the side of a
     gateway and the pivot of the heavy gate revolved in the shallow
     hole or depression in its centre. As stone is not found in the
     alluvial soil of Babylonia, the blocks for gate-sockets had to be
     brought from great distances and they were consequently highly
     prized. The kings and patesis who used them in their buildings
     generally had their names and titles engraved upon them, and they
     thus form a valuable class of inscriptions for the study of the
     early history. Photograph by Messrs. Man-sell & Co.

He thus added greatly to the wealth of Shirpurla by increasing the area
of territory under cultivation, and he continued to exercise authority
in Gishkhu by means of officers appointed by himself. A record of his
victory over Gishkhu was inscribed by Entemena upon a number of clay
cones, that the fame of it might be preserved in future days to the
honour of Ningirsu and the goddess Ninâ. He ends this record with a
prayer for the preservation of the frontier. If ever in time to come the
men of Gishkhu should break out across the frontier-ditch of Ningirsu,
or the frontier-ditch of Ninâ, in order to seize or lay waste the lands
of Shirpurla, whether they be men of the city of Gishkhu itself or men
of the mountains, he prays that Enlil may destroy them and that Ningirsu
may lay his curse upon them; and if ever the warriors of his own city
should be called upon to defend it, he prays that they may be full of
courage and ardour for their task.

The greater part of this information with regard to the struggles
between Gishkhu and Shirpurla, between the period of Mesilim, King of
Kish, and that of Entemena, is supplied by the inscription of the latter
ruler which has been found written around a small cone of clay. There is
little doubt that the text was also engraved by the orders of Entemena
upon a stone stele which was set up, like those of Mesilim and Eannadu,
upon the frontier. Other copies of the inscription were probably
engraved and erected in the cities of Gishkhu and Shirpurla, and to
ensure the preservation of the record Entemena probably had numerous
copies of it made upon small cones of clay which were preserved and
possibly buried in the structure of the temples of Shirpurla. Entemena’s
foresight in this matter has been justified by results, for, while his
great memorials of stone have perished, the preservation of one of his
small cones has sufficed to make known to later ages his own and his
forefathers’ prowess in their continual contests with their ancient rival
Gishkhu.

After the reign of Entemena we have little information with regard to
the relations between Gishkhu and Shirpurla, though it is probable that
the effects of his decisive victory continued to exercise a moderating
influence on Gishkhu’s desire for expansion and secured a period
of peaceful development for Shirpurla without the continual fear of
encroachments on the part of her turbulent neighbour. We may assume that
this period of tranquillity continued during the reigns of Enannadu II,
Enlitarzi, and Lugal-anda, but, when in the reign of Urukagina the men
of Gishkhu once more emerge from their temporary obscurity, they appear
as the authors of deeds of rapine and bloodshed committed on a scale
that was rare even in that primitive age.

In the earlier stages of their rivalry Gishkhu had always been defeated,
or at any rate checked, in her actual conflicts with Shirpurla. When
taking the aggressive the men of Gishkhu seem generally to have confined
themselves to the seizure of territory, such as the district of Gu-edin,
which was situated on the western bank of the Shaft el-Hai and divided
from their own lands only by the frontier-ditch. If they ever actually
crossed the Shaft el-Hai and raided the lands on its eastern bank, they
never ventured to attack the city of Shirpurla itself. And, although
their raids were attended with some success in their initial stages, the
ruling patesis of Shirpurla were always strong enough to check them; and
on most occasions they carried the war into the territory of Gishkhu,
with the result that they readjusted the boundary on their own terms.
But it would appear that all these primitive Chalæan cities were subject
to alternate periods of expansion and defeat, and Shirpurla was not an
exception to the rule. It was probably not due so much to Urukagina’s
personal qualities or defects as a leader that Shirpurla suffered
the greatest reverse in her history during his reign, but rather to
Gishkhu’s gradual increase in power at a time when Shirpurla herself
remained inactive, possibly lulled into a false sense of security by the
memory of her victories in the past. Whatever may have been the cause of
Gishkhu’s final triumph, it is certain that it took place in Urukagina’s
reign, and that for many years afterwards the hegemony of Southern
Babylonia remained in her hands, while Shirpurla for a long period
passed completely out of existence as an independent or semi-independent
state.

The evidence of the catastrophe that befell Shirpurla at this period is
furnished by a small clay tablet recently found at Telloh during Captain
Cros’s excavations on that site. The document on which the facts in
question are recorded had no official character, and in all probability
it had not been stored in any library or record chamber. The actual spot
at Telloh where it was found was to the north of the mound in which
the most ancient buildings have been recovered, and at the depth of two
metres below the surface. No other tablets appear to have been found
near it, but that fact in itself would not be sufficient evidence on
which to base any theory as to its not having originally formed part of
the archives of the city. Its unofficial character is attested by the
form of the tablet and the manner in which the information upon it is
arranged. In shape there is little to distinguish the document from the
tablets of accounts inscribed in the reign of Urukagina, great numbers
of which have been found recently at Telloh. Roughly square in shape,
its edges are slightly convex, and the text is inscribed in a series of
narrow columns upon both the obverse and the reverse. The text itself
is not a carefully arranged composition, such as are the votive and
historical inscriptions of early Sumerian rulers. It consists of a
series of short sentences enumerating briefly and without detail the
separate deeds of violence and sacrilege performed by the men of Gishkhu
after their capture of the city. It is little more than a catalogue or
list of the shrines and temples destroyed during the sack of the city,
or defiled by the blood of the men of Shirpurla who were slain therein.
No mention is made in the list of the palace of the Urukagina, or of any
secular building, or of the dwellings of the citizens themselves. There
is little doubt that these also were despoiled and destroyed by the
victorious enemy, but the writer of the tablet is not concerned for the
moment with the fate of his city or his fellow citizens. He appears to
be overcome with the thought of the deeds of sacrilege committed against
his gods; his mind is entirely taken up with the magnitude of the
insult offered to the god Ningirsu, the city-god of Shirpurla. His bare
enumeration of the deeds of sacrilege and violence loses little by its
brevity, and, when he has ended the list of his accusations against the
men of Gishkhu, he curses the goddess to whose influence he attributes
their success.

No composition at all like this document has yet been recovered, and as
it is not very long we may here give a translation of the text. It will
be seen that the writer plunges at once into the subject of his
charges against the men of Gishkhu. No historical _résumé_ prefaces
his accusations, and he gives no hint of the circumstances that have
rendered their delivery possible. The temples of his city have been
profaned and destroyed, and his indignation finds vent in a mere
enumeration of their titles. To his mind the facts need no comment,
for to him it is barely conceivable that such sacred places of ancient
worship should have been defiled. He launches his indictment against
Gishkhu in the following terms: “The men of Gishkhu have set fire to the
temple of E-ki [... ], they have set fire to Antashura, and they have
carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have
shed blood in the palace of Tirash, they have shed blood in Abzubanda,
they have shed blood in the shrine of Enlil and in the shrine of the
Sun-god, they have shed blood in Akhush, and they have carried away the
silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have shed blood in the
Gikana of the sacred grove of the goddess Ninmakh, and they have carried
away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have shed blood
in Baga, and they have carried away the silver and the precious stones
therefrom! They have shed blood in Abzu-ega, they have set fire to
the temple of Gatumdug, and they have carried away the silver and the
precious stones therefrom, and have destroyed her statue! They have set
fire to the.... of the temple E-anna of the goddess Ninni, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom, and have
destroyed her statue! They have shed blood in Shapada, and they have
carried away the silver and precious stones therefrom! They have....
in Khenda, they have shed blood in the temple of Nindar in the town
of Kiab, and they have carried away the silver and the precious stones
therefrom! They have set fire to the temple of Dumuzi-abzu in the town
of Kinunir, and they have carried away the silver and the precious
stones therefrom! They have set fire to the temple of Lugaluru, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They
have shed blood in E-engura, the temple of the goddess Ninâ, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They
have shed blood in Sag..., the temple of Amageshtin, and the silver
and the precious stones of Amageshtin have they carried away! They have
removed the grain from Ginarbaniru, the field of the god Ningirsu,
so much of it as was under cultivation! The men of Gishkhu, by the
despoiling of Shirpurla, have committed a transgression against the god
Ningirsu! The power that is come unto them, from them shall be taken
away! Of transgression on the part of Urukagina, King of Girsu, there
is none. As for Lugalzaggisi, patesi of Gishkhu, may his goddess Ni-daba
bear on her head (the weight of) this transgression!”

Such is the account, which has come down to us from the rough tablet of
some unknown scribe, of the greatest misfortune experienced by Shirpurla
during the long course of her history. Many of the great temples
mentioned in the text as among those which were burnt down and despoiled
of their treasures are referred to more than once in the votive and
historical inscriptions of earlier rulers of Shirpurla, who occupied the
throne before the ill-fated Urukagina. The names of some of them, too,
are to be found in the texts of the later pate-sis of that city, so
that it may be concluded that in course of time they were rebuilt and
restored to their former splendour. But there is no doubt that the
despoiling and partial destruction of Shirpurla in the reign of
Urukagina had a lasting effect upon the fortunes of that city, and
effectively curtailed her influence among the greater cities of Southern
Babylonia.

We may now turn our attention to the leader of the men of Gishkhu, under
whose direction they achieved their final triumph over their ancient,
and for long years more powerful, rival Shirpurla. The writer of our
tablet mentions his name in the closing words of his text when he curses
him and his goddess for the destruction and sacrilege that they have
wrought. “As for Lugalzaggisi,” he says, “patesi of Gishkhu, may his
goddess Nidaba bear on her head (the weight of ) this transgression!”
 Now the name of Lugalzaggisi has been found upon a number of fragments
of vases made of white calcite stalagmite which were discovered by Mr.
Haynes during his excavations at Nippur. All the vases were engraved
with the same inscription, so that it was possible by piecing the
fragments of text together to obtain a more or less complete copy of
the records which were originally engraved upon each of them. From
these records we learned for the first time, not only the name of
Lugalzaggisi, but the fact that he founded a powerful coalition of
cities in Babylonia at what was obviously a very early period in the
history of the country. In the text he describes himself as “King of
Erech, king of the world, the priest of Ana, the hero of Nidaba, the
son of Ukush, patesi of Gishkhu, the hero of Nidaba, the man who was
favourably regarded by the sure eye of the King of the Lands (i.e.
the god Enlil), the great patesi of Enlil, unto whom understanding was
granted by Enki, the chosen of the Sun-god, the exalted minister of
Enzu, endowed with strength by the Sun-god, the worshipper of Ninni, the
son who was conceived by Nidaba, who was nourished by Ninkharsag with
the milk of life, the attendant of Umu, priestess of Erech, the servant
who was trained by Ninâgidkhadu, the mistress of Erech, the great
minister of the gods.” Lugalzaggisi then goes on to describe the extent
of his dominion, and he says: “When the god Enlil, the lord of the
countries, bestowed upon Lugalzaggisi the kingdom of the world, and
granted unto him success in the sight of the world, when he filled the
lands with his power, and conquered them from the rising of the sun unto
the setting of the same, at that time he made straight his path from the
Lower Sea of the Tigris and Euphrates unto the Upper Sea, and he granted
him dominion over all from the rising of the sun unto the setting of the
same, so that he caused the lands to dwell in peace.”

Now when first the text of this inscription was published there existed
only vague indications of the date to be assigned to Lugalzaggisi and
the kingdom that he founded. It was clear from the titles which he bore,
that, though Gishkhu was his native place, he had extended his authority
far beyond that city and had chosen Erech as his capital. Moreover,
he claimed an empire extending from “the Lower Sea of the Tigris and
Euphrates unto the Upper Sea.” There is no doubt that the Lower Sea here
mentioned is the Persian Gulf, and it has been suggested that the Upper
Sea may be taken to be the Mediterranean, though it may possibly have
been Lake Van or Lake Urmi. But whichever of these views might be
adopted, it was clear that Lugalzaggisi was a great conqueror, and had
achieved the right to assume the high-sounding title of lugal halama,
“king of the world.” In these circumstances it was of the first
importance for the study of primitive Chaldæan history and chronology
to ascertain approximately the period at which Lugalzaggisi reigned.

The evidence on which such a question could be provisionally settled was
of the vaguest and most uncertain character, but such as it was it
had to suffice, in the absence of more reliable data. In settling all
problems connected with early Chaldæan chronology, the starting-point
was, and in fact still is, the period of Sargon I, King of Agade,
inasmuch as the date of his reign is settled, according to the reckoning
of the scribes of Nabonidus, as about 3800 B.C. It is true that this
date has been called in question, and ingenious suggestions for amending
it have been made by some writers, while others have rejected it
altogether, holding that it merely represented a guess on the part of
the late Babylonians and could be safely ignored in the chronological
schemes which they brought forward. But nearly every fresh discovery
made in the last few years has tended to confirm some point in the
traditions current among the later Babylonians with regard to the
earlier history of their country. Consequently, reliance may be placed
with increased confidence on the truth of such traditions as a
whole, and we may continue to accept those statements which yet await
confirmation from documents more nearly contemporary with the early
period to which they refer. It is true that such a date as that assigned
by Nabonidus to Sargon is not to be regarded as absolutely fixed, for
Nabonidus is obviously speaking in round numbers, and we may allow for
some minor inaccuracies in the calculations of his scribes. But it is
certain that the later Babylonian priests and scribes had a wealth of
historical material at their disposal which has not come down to us. We
may therefore accept the date given by Nabonidus for Sargon of Agade
and his son Narâm-Sin as approximately accurate, and this is also the
opinion of the majority of writers on early Babylonian history.

The diggings at Nippur furnished indications that certain inscriptions
found on that site and written in a very archaic form of script were
to be assigned to a period earlier than that of Sargon. One class of
evidence was obtained from a careful study of the different levels at
which the inscriptions and the remains of buildings were found. At a
comparatively deep level in the mound inscriptions of Sargon himself
were recovered, along with bricks stamped with the name of Narâm-Sin,
his son. It was, therefore, a reasonable conclusion roughly to date the
particular stratum in which these objects were found to the period of
the empire established by Sargon, with its centre at Agade. Later on
excavations were carried to a lower level, and remains of buildings
were discovered which appeared to belong to a still earlier period
of civilization. An altar was found standing in a small enclosure
surrounded by a kind of curb. Near by were two immense clay vases which
appeared to have been placed on a ramp or inclined plane leading up to
the altar, and remains were also found of a massive brick building in
which was an arch of brick. No inscriptions were actually found at this
level, but in the upper level assigned to Sargon were a number of texts
which might very probably be assigned to the pre-Sargonic period. None
of these were complete, and they had the appearance of having been
intentionally broken into small fragments. There was therefore something
to be said for the theory that they might have been inscribed by the
builders of the construction in the lowest levels of the mound, and that
they were destroyed and scattered by some conqueror who had laid their
city in ruins.

But all such evidence derived from noting the levels at which
inscriptions are found is in its nature extremely uncertain and liable
to many different interpretations, especially if the strata show signs
of having been disturbed. Where a pavement or building is still intact,
with the inscribed bricks of the builder remaining in their original
positions, conclusions may be confidently drawn with regard to the age
of the building and its relative antiquity to the strata above and below
it. But the strata in the lowest levels at Nippur, as we have seen, were
not in this condition, and such evidence as they furnished could only be
accepted if confirmed by independent data. Such confirmation was to be
found by examination of the early inscriptions themselves.

It has been remarked that most of them were broken into small pieces,
as though by some invader of the country; but this was not the case with
certain gate-sockets and great blocks of diorite which were too hard
and big to be easily broken. Moreover, any conqueror of a city would be
unlikely to spend time and labour in destroying materials which might
be usefully employed in the construction of other buildings which he
himself might erect. Stone could not be obtained in the alluvial plains
of Babylonia and had to be quarried in the mountains and brought great
distances.

[Illustration: 188.jpg STONE GATE]

     Stone Gate-Socket Bearing An Inscription of Uk-Engur, An Early King
     of The City Of Ur. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

From any building of his predecessors which he razed to the ground, an
invader would therefore remove the gate-sockets and blocks of stone for
his own use, supposing he contemplated building on the site. If he left
the city in ruins and returned to his own country, some subsequent king,
when clearing the ruined site for building operations, might come across
the stones, and he would not leave them buried, but would use them for
his own construction. And this is what actually did happen in the case
of some of the building materials of one of these early kings, from the
lower strata of Nippur. Certain of the blocks which bore the name of
Lugalkigubnidudu had been used again by Sargon, King of Agade, who
engraved his own name upon them without obliterating the name of the
former king.

It followed that Lugalkigubnidudu belonged to the pre-Sargonic period,
and, although the same conclusive evidence was not forthcoming in the
case of Lugalzag-gisi, he also without much hesitation was set in
this early period, mainly on the strength of the archaic forms of the
characters employed in his inscriptions. In fact, they were held to be
so archaic that, not only was he said to have reigned before Sargon of
Agade, but he was set in the very earliest period of Chaldæan history,
and his empire was supposed to have been contemporaneous with the very
earliest rulers of Shirpurla. The new inscription found by Captain
Cros will cause this opinion to be considerably modified. While it
corroborates the view that Lugalzaggisi is to be set in the pre-Sargonic
period, it proves that he lived and reigned very shortly before him. As
we have already seen, he was the contemporary of Urukagina, who belongs
to the middle period of the history of Shirpurla. Lugalzaggisi’s capture
and sack of the city of Shirpurla was only one of a number of conquests
which he achieved. His father Ukush had been merely patesi of the city
of Gish-khu, but he himself was not content with the restricted sphere
of authority which such a position implied, and he eventually succeeded
in enforcing his authority over the greater part of Babylonia. From
the fact that he styles himself King of Erech, we may conclude that
he removed his capital from Ukush to that city, after having probably
secured its submission by force of arms. In fact, his title of “king of
the world” can only have been won as the result of many victories, and
Captain Cros’s tablet gives us a glimpse of the methods by which he
managed to secure himself against the competition of any rival. The
capture of Shirpurla must have been one of his earliest achievements,
for its proximity to Gish-khu rendered its reduction a necessary
prelude to any more extensive plan of conquest. But the kingdom which
Lugalzaggisi founded cannot have endured long.

Under Sargon of Agade, the Semites gained the upper hand in Babylonia,
and Erech, Grishkhu, and Shirpurla, as well as the other ancient cities
in the land, fell in turn under his domination and formed part of the
extensive empire which he ruled.

Concerning the later rulers of city-states of Babylonia which succeeded
the disruption of the empire founded by Sargon of Agade and consolidated
by Narâm-Sin, his son, the excavations have little to tell us which has
not already been made use of by Prof. Maspero in his history of this
period.[4]

     [4] The tablets found at Telloh by the late M. de Sarzec, and
     published during his lifetime, fall into two main classes,
     which date from different periods in early Chaldæan
     history. The great majority belong to the period when the
     city of Ur held pre-eminence among the cities of Southern
     Babylonia, and they are dated in the reigns of Dungi, Bur-
     Sin, Gamil-Sin, and Ine-Sin. The other and smaller
     collection belongs to the earlier period of Sargon and
     Narâm-Sin; while many of the tablets found in M. de Sarzec’s
     last diggings, which were published after his death, are to
     be set in the great gap between these two periods. Some of
     those recently discovered, which belong to the period of
     Dungi, contain memoranda concerning the supply of food for
     the maintenance of officials stopping at Shirpurla in the
     course of journeys in Babylonia and Elam, and they throw an
     interesting light on the close and constant communication
     which took place at this time between the great cities of
     Mesopotamia and the neighbouring countries.

[Illustration: 190.jpg STATUE OF GUDEA.]

     The most famous of the later patesis, or viceroys, of
     Shirpurla, the Sumerian city in Southern Babylonia now
     marked by the mounds of Telloh. Photograph by Messrs.
     Mansell & Co.

Ur, Isin, and,Larsam succeeded one another in the position of leading
city in Babylonia, holding Mppur, Eridu, Erech, Shirpurla, and the other
chief cities in a condition of semi-dependence upon themselves. We may
note that the true reading of the name of the founder of the dynasty
of Ur has now been ascertained from a syllabary to be Ur-Engur; and an
unpublished chronicle in the British Museum relates that his son Dungi
cared greatly for the city of Eridu, but sacked Babylon and carried off
its spoil, together with the treasures from E-sagila, the great temple
of Marduk. Such episodes must have been common at this period when each
city was striving for hegemony. Meanwhile, Shirpurla remained the centre
of Sumerian influence in Babylonia, and her patesis were content to owe
allegiance to so powerful a ruler as Dungi, King of Ur, while at all
times exercising complete authority within their own jurisdiction.

During the most recent diggings that have been carried out at Telloh a
find of considerable value to the history of Sumerian art has been
made. The find is also of great general interest, since it enables us
to identify a portrait of Gudea, the most famous of the later Sumerian
patesis. In the course of excavating the Tell of Tablets Captain Cros
found a little seated statue made of diorite. It was not found in place,
but upside down, and appeared to have been thrown with other débris
scattered in that portion of the mound. On lifting it from the trench it
was seen that the head of the statue was broken off, as is the case
with all the other statues of Gudea found at Telloh. The statue bore an
inscription of Gudea, carefully executed and well preserved, but it
was smaller than other statues of the same ruler that had been
already recovered, and the absence of the head thus robbed it of any
extraordinary interest. On its arrival at the Louvre, M. Léon Heuzey was
struck by its general resemblance to a Sumerian head of diorite formerly
discovered by M. de Sarzec at Telloh, which has been preserved in the
Louvre for many years. On applying the head to the newly found statue,
it was found to fit it exactly, and to complete the monument, and we
are thus enabled to identify the features of Gudea. Prom a photographic
reproduction of this statue, it is seen that the head is larger than
it should be, in proportion to the body, a characteristic which is also
apparent in a small Sumerian statue preserved in the British Museum.

[Illustration: 192.jpg TABLET INSCRIBED IN SUMERIAN WITH DETAILS OF A
SURVEY OF CERTAIN PROPERTY.]

     Probably situated in the neighbourhood of Telloh. The
     circular shape is very unusual, and appears to have been
     used only for survey-tablets. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell
     & Co.

Gudea caused many statues of himself to be made out of the hard diorite
which he brought for that purpose from the Sinaitic peninsula, and from
the inscriptions preserved upon them it is possible to ascertain the
buildings in which they were originally placed. Thus one of the statues
previously found was set up in the temple of Ninkharsag, two others in
E-ninnû, the temple of the god Ningirsu, three more in the temple of the
goddess Bau, one in E-anna, the temple of the goddess Ninni, and another
in the temple of Gatumdug. The newly found statue of the king was made
to be set up in the temple erected by Gudea at Girsu in honour of the
god Ningishzida, as is recorded in the inscription engraved on the front
of the king’s robe, which reads as follows:

“In the day when the god Ningirsu, the strong warrior of Enlil, granted
unto the god Ningishzida, the son of Ninâzu, the beloved of the gods,
(the guardianship of) the foundation of the city and of the hills and
valleys, on that day Gudea, patesi of Shirpurla, the just man who
loveth his god, who for his master Ningirsu hath constructed his temple
E-ninnu, called the shining Imgig, and his temple E-pa, the temple
of-the seven zones of heaven, and for the goddess Ninâ, the queen, his
lady, hath constructed the temple Sirara-shum, which riseth higher than
(all) the temples in the world, and hath constructed their temples for
the great gods of Lagash, built for his god Ningishzida his temple in
Girsu. Whosoever shall proclaim the god Ningirsu as his god, even as
I proclaim him, may he do no harm unto the temple of my god! May he
proclaim the name of this temple! May that man be my friend, and may he
proclaim my name! Gudea hath made the statue, and ‘Unto - Gudea - the
- builder - of - the - temple - hath life-been-given hath he called its
name, and he hath brought it into the temple.”

The long name which Gudea gave to the statue, “Unto - Gudea - the -
builder - of - the - temple - hath - life-been-given,” is characteristic
of the practice of the Sumerian patesis, who always gave long and
symbolical names to statues, stelae, and sacred objects dedicated and
set up in their temples. The occasion on which the temple was built, and
this statue erected within it, seems to have been the investiture of
the god Ningishzida with special and peculiar powers, and it possibly
inaugurated his introduction into the pantheon of Shirpurla. Ningishzida
is called in the inscription the son of Ninazu, who was the husband of
the Queen of the Underworld.

In one of his aspects he was therefore probably a god of the underworld
himself, and it is in this character that he was appointed by Ningirsu
as guardian of the city’s foundations. But “the hills and valleys”
 (i.e. the open country) were also put under his jurisdiction, so that
in another aspect he was a god of vegetation. It is therefore not
improbable that, like the god Dumuzi, or Tammuz, he was supposed to
descend into the underworld in winter, ascending to the surface of the
earth with the earliest green shoots of vegetation in the spring.*

     * Cf. Thureau-Dangin, Rev. d’Assyr., vol. vi. (1904), p. 24.

A most valuable contribution has recently been made to our knowledge of
Sumerian religion and of the light in which these early rulers regarded
the cult and worship of their gods, by the complete interpretation of
the long texts inscribed upon the famous cylinders of Gudea, the patesi
of Shirpurla, which have been preserved for many years in the Louvre.
These two great cylinders of baked clay were discovered by the late M.
de Sarzec so long ago as the year 1877, during the first period of his
diggings at Telloh, and, although the general nature of their contents
has long been recognized, no complete translation of the texts inscribed
upon them had been published until a few months ago. M. Thureau-Dangin,
who has made the early Sumerian texts his special study, has devoted
himself to their interpretation for some years past, and he has just
issued the first part of his monograph upon them. In view of the
importance of the texts and of the light they throw upon the religious
beliefs and practices of the early Sumerians, a somewhat detailed
account of their contents may here be given.

The occasion on which the cylinders were made was the rebuilding by
Gudea of E-ninnû, the great temple of the god Ningirsu, in the city of
Shirpurla. The two cylinders supplement one another, one of them having
been inscribed while the work of construction was still in progress, the
other after the completion of the temple, when the god Ningirsu had been
installed within his shrine with due pomp and ceremony. It would appear
that Southern Babylonia had been suffering from a prolonged drought, and
that the water in the rivers and canals had fallen, so that the crops
had suffered and the country was threatened with famine. Gudea was at a
loss to know by what means he might restore prosperity to his country,
when one night he had a dream, and it was in consequence of this dream
that he eventually erected one of the most sumptuously appointed of
Sumerian temples. By this means he secured the return of Ningirsu’s
favour and that of the other gods, and his country once more enjoyed the
blessings of peace and prosperity.

In the opening words of the first of his cylinders Gudea describes how
the great gods themselves took counsel and decreed that he should build
the temple of E-ninnû and thereby restore to his city the supply of
water it had formerly enjoyed. He records that on the day on which the
destinies were fixed in heaven and upon earth, Enlil, the chief of the
gods, and Ningirsu, the city-god of Shirpurla, held converse. And Enlil,
turning to Ningirsu, said: “In my city that which is fitting is not
done. The stream doth not rise. The stream of Enlil doth not rise. The
high waters shine not, neither do they show their splendour. The stream
of Enlil bringeth not good water like the Tigris. Let the King (i.e.
Ningirsu) therefore proclaim the temple. Let the decrees of the temple
E-ninnû be made illustrious in heaven and upon earth!” The great gods
did not communicate their orders directly to Gudea, but conveyed their
wishes to him by means of a dream. And while the patesi slept a vision
of the night came to him, and he beheld a man whose stature was so great
that it equalled the heavens and the earth. And by the crown he wore
upon his head Gudea knew that the figure must be a god. And by his side
was the divine eagle, the emblem of Shirpurla, and his feet rested upon
the whirlwind, and a lion was crouching upon his right hand and upon his
left. And the figure spoke to the patesi, but he did not understand the
meaning of the words. Then it seemed to Gudea that the sun rose from
the earth and he beheld a woman holding in her hand a pure reed, and she
carried also a tablet on which was a star of the heavens, and she seemed
to take counsel with herself. And while Gudea was gazing he seemed to
see a second man who was like a warrior; and he carried a slab of lapis
lazuli and on it he drew out the plan of a temple. And before the patesi
himself it seemed that a fair cushion was placed, and upon the cushion
was set a mould, and within the mould was a brick, the brick of destiny.
And on the right hand the patesi beheld an ass which lay upon the
ground.

Such was the dream which Gudea beheld in a vision of the night, and he
was troubled because he could not interpret it. So he decided to go
to the goddess Ninâ, who could divine all mysteries of the gods, and
beseech her to tell him the meaning of the vision. But before applying
to the goddess for her help, he thought it best to secure the mediation
of the god Ningirsu and the goddess Gatumdug, in order that they should
use their influence with Ninâ to induce her to reveal the interpretation
of the dream. So the patesi set out to the temple of Ningirsu, and,
having offered a sacrifice and poured out fresh water, he prayed to the
god that his sister, Ninâ, the child of Eridu, might be prevailed upon
to give him help. And the god hearkened to his prayer. Then Gudea made
offerings, and before the sleeping-chamber of the goddess Gatumdug he
offered a sacrifice and poured out fresh water. And he prayed to the
goddess, calling her his queen and the child of the pure heaven, who
gave life to the countries and befriended and preserved the people or
the man on whom she looked with favour.

“I have no mother,” cried Gudea, “but thou art my mother! I have no
father, but thou art a father to me!” And the goddess Gatumdug gave
ear to the patesi’s prayer. Thus encouraged by her favour and that of
Ningirsu, Gudea set out for the temple of the goddess Ninâ.

On his arrival at the temple, the patesi offered a sacrifice and poured
out fresh water, as he had already done when approaching the presence of
Ningirsu and Gatumdug. And he prayed to Ninâ, as the goddess who divines
the secrets of the gods, beseeching her to interpret the vision that had
been sent to him; and he then recounted to her the details of his dream.
When the patesi had finished his story, the goddess addressed him and
told him that she would explain the meaning of his dream to him. And
this was the interpretation of the dream. The man whose stature was so
great that it equalled the heavens and the earth, whose head was that
of a god, at whose side was the divine eagle, whose feet rested on the
whirlwind, while a lion couched on his right hand and on his left, was
her brother, the god Ningirsu. And the words which he uttered were an
order to the patesi that he should build the temple E-ninnû. And the sun
which rose from the earth before the patesi was the god Ningishzida,
for like the sun he goes forth from the earth. And the maiden who held
a pure reed in her hand, and carried the tablet with the star, was her
sister, the goddess Nidaba: the star was the pure star of the temple’s
construction, which she proclaimed. And the second man, who was like a
warrior and carried the slab of lapis lazuli, was the god Nindub, and the
plan of the temple which he drew was the plan of E-ninnû. And the brick
which rested in its mould upon the cushion was the sacred brick of
E-ninnû. And as for the ass which lay upon the ground, that, the goddess
said, was the patesi himself.

Having interpreted the meaning of the dream, the goddess Ninâ proceeded
to give Gudea instruction as to how he should go to work to build the
temple. She told him first of all to go to his treasure-house and bring
forth his treasures from their sealed cases, and out of these to make
certain offerings which he was to place near the god Ningirsu, in the
temple in which he was dwelling at that time. The offerings were to
consist of a chariot, adorned with pure metal and precious stones;
bright arrows in a quiver; the weapon of the god, his sacred emblem, on
which Gudea was to inscribe his own name; and finally a lyre, the music
of which was wont to soothe the god when he took counsel with himself.
Ninâ added that if the patesi carried out her instructions and made the
offerings she had specified, Ningirsu would reveal to him the plan on
which the temple was to be built, and would also bless him. Gudea bowed
himself down in token of his submission to the commands of the goddess,
and proceeded to execute them forthwith. He brought out his treasures,
and from the precious woods and metals which he possessed his craftsmen
fashioned the objects he was to present, and he set them in Ningirsu’s
temple near to the god. He worked day and night, and, having prepared a
suitable spot in the precincts of the temple at the place of judgment,
he spread out upon it as offerings a fat sheep and a kid and the skin of
a young female kid. Then he built a fire of cypress and cedar and other
aromatic woods, to make a sweet savour, and, entering the inner chamber
of the temple, he offered a prayer to Ningirsu. He said that he wished
to build the temple, but he had received no sign that this was the will
of the god, and he prayed for a sign.

While he prayed the patesi was stretched out upon the ground, and the
god, standing near his head, then answered him. He said that he who
should build his temple was none other than Gudea, and that he would
give him the sign for which he asked. But first he described the plan
on which the temple was to be built, naming its various shrines and
chambers and describing the manner in which they were to be fashioned
and adorned. And the god promised that when Gudea should build the
temple, the land would once more enjoy abundance, for Ningirsu would
send a wind which should proclaim to the heavens the return of the
waters. And on that day the waters would fall from the heavens, the
water in the ditches and canals would rise, and water would gush out
from the dry clefts in the ground. And the great fields would once
more produce their crops, and oil would be poured out plenteously in
Sumer[sp.] and wool would again be weighed in great abundance. In that
day the god would go to the mountain where dwelt the whirlwind, and he
would himself direct the wind which should give the land the breath of
life. Gudea must therefore work day and night at the task of building
the temple. One company of men was to relieve another at its toil, and
during the night the men were to kindle lights so that the plain should
be as bright as day. Thus the builders would build continuously. Men
were also to be sent to the mountains to cut down cedars and pines and
other trees and bring their trunks to the city, while masons were to go
to the mountains and were to cut and transport huge blocks of stone to
be used in the construction of the temple. Finally the god gave Gudea
the sign for which he asked. The sign was that he should feel his side
touched as by a flame, and thereby he should know that he was the man
chosen by Ningirsu to carry out his commands.

Gudea bowed his head in submission, and his first act was to consult the
omens, and the omens were favourable. He then proceeded to purify the
city by special rites, so that the mother when angered did not chide her
son, and the master did not strike his servant’s head, and the mistress,
though provoked by her handmaid, did not smite her face. And Gudea drove
all the evil wizards and sorcerers from the city, and he purified and
sanctified the city completely. Then he kindled a great fire of cedar
and other aromatic woods, to make a sweet savour for the gods, and
prayers were offered day and night; and the patesi addressed a prayer
to the Anun-naki, or Spirits of the Earth, who dwelt in Shirpurla,
and assigned a place to them in the temple. Then, having completed
his purification of the city itself, he consecrated its immediate
surroundings. Thus he consecrated the district of Gu-edin, whence the
revenues of Ningirsu were derived, and the lands of the goddess Ninâ
with their populous villages. And he consecrated the wild and savage
bulls which no man could turn aside, and the cedars which were sacred
to Ningirsu, and the cattle of the plains. And he consecrated the armed
men, and the famous warriors, and the warriors of the Sun-god. And the
emblems of the god Ningirsu, and of the two great goddesses, Ninâ and
Ninni, he installed before them in their shrines.

Then Gudea sent far and wide to fetch materials for the construction of
the temple. And the Elamite came from Elani, and men of Susa came from
Susa, and men brought wood from the mountains of Sinai and Melukh-kha.
And into the mountain of cedars, where no man before had penetrated,
the patesi cut a road, and he brought cedars and beams of other precious
woods in great quantities to the city. And he also made a road into the
mountain where stone was quarried, into places where no man before had
penetrated. And he carried great blocks of stone down from the mountain
and loaded them into barges and brought them to the city. And the barges
brought bitumen and plaster, and they were loaded as though they were
carrying grain, and all manner of great things were brought to the
city. Copper ore was brought from the mountain of copper in the land of
Kimash, and gold was brought in powder from the mountains, and silver
was brought from the mountains and porphyry from the land of Melukhkha,
and marble from the mountain of marble. And the patesi installed
goldsmiths and silversmiths, who wrought in these precious metals, for
the adornment of the temple; and he brought smiths who worked in copper
and lead, who were priests of Nin-tu-kalama. In his search for fitting
materials for the building of the temple, Gudea journeyed from the lower
country to the upper country, and from the upper country to the lower
country he returned.

The only other materials now wanting for the construction of the temple
were the sun-dried bricks of clay, of which the temple platform and
the structure of the temple itself were in the main composed. Their
manufacture was now inaugurated by a symbolical ceremony carried out by
the patesi in person. At dawn he performed an ablution with the fitting
rites that accompanied it, and when the day was more advanced he slew
a bull and a kid as sacrifices, and he then entered the temple of
Ningirsu, where he prostrated himself. And he took the sacred mould
and the fair cushion on which it rested in the temple, and he poured a
libation into the mould. Afterwards, having made offerings of honey and
butter, and having burnt incense, he placed the cushion and the mould
upon his head and carried it to the appointed place. There he placed
clay in the mould, shaping it into a brick, and he left the brick in its
mould within the temple. And last of all he sprinkled oil of cedar-wood
around.

The next day at dawn Gudea broke the mould and set the brick in the sun.
And the Sun-god was rejoiced at the brick that he had fashioned. And
Gudea took the brick and raised it on high towards the heavens, and he
carried the brick to his people. In this way the patesi inaugurated the
manufacture of the sun-dried bricks for the temple, the sacred brick
which he had made being the symbol and pattern of the innumerable bricks
to be used in its construction. He then marked out the plan of the
temple, and the text states that he devoted himself to the building of
the temple like a young man who has begun building a house and allows
no pleasure to interfere with his task. And he chose out skilled workmen
and employed them on the building, and he was filled with joy. The gods,
too, are stated to have helped with the building, for Enki fixed the
temennu of the temple, and the goddess Ninâ looked after its oracles,
and Gatumdug, the mother of Shir-purla, fashioned bricks for it morning
and evening, while the goddess Bau sprinkled aromatic oil of cedar-wood.
Gudea himself laid its foundations, and as he did so he blessed the
temple seven times, comparing it to the sacred brick, to the holy
libation-vase, to the divine eagle of Shirpurla, to a terrible couching
panther, to the beautiful heavens, to the day of offerings, and to the
morning light which brightens the land. He caused the temple to rise
towards heaven like a mountain, or like a cedar growing in the desert.
He built it of bricks of Sumer, and the timbers which he set in place
were as strong as the dragon of the deep.

While he was engaged on the building Gudea took counsel of the god Enki,
and he built a fountain for the gods, where they might drink. With the
great stones which he had brought and fashioned he built a reservoir
and a basin for the temple. And seven of the great stones he set up as
stelæ, and he gave them favourable names. The text then recounts
the various parts and shrines of the temple, and it describes their
splendours in similes drawn from the heavens and the earth and the
abyss, or deep, beneath the earth. The temple itself is described as,
being like the crescent of the new moon, or like the sun in the midst
of the stars, or like a mountain of lapis lazuli, or like a mountain of
shining marble. Parts of it are said to have been terrible and strong as
a savage bull, or a lion, or the antelope of the abyss, or the monster
Lakhamu who dwells in the abyss, or the sacred leopard that inspires
terror. One of the doors of the temple was guarded by a figure of the
hero who slew the monster with six heads, and at another door was a good
dragon, and at another a lion; opposite the city were set figures of
the seven heroes, and facing the rising sun was fixed the emblem of the
Sun-god. Figures of other heroes and favourable monsters were set up as
guardians of other portions of the temple. The fastenings of the main
entrance were decorated with dragons shooting out their tongues, and the
bolt of the great door was fashioned like a raging hound.

After this description of the construction and adornment of the
temple the text goes on to narrate how Gudea arranged for its material
endowment. He stalled oxen and sheep, for sacrifice and feasting, in the
outhouses and pens within the temple precincts, and he heaped up grain
in its granaries. Its storehouses he filled with spices so that
they were like the Tigris when its waters are in flood, and in its
treasure-chambers he piled up precious stones, and silver, and lead in
abundance. Within the temple precincts he planted a sacred garden which
was like a mountain covered with vines; and on the terrace he built
a great reservoir, or tank, lined with lead, in addition to the great
stone reservoir within the temple itself. He constructed a special
dwelling-place for the sacred doves, and among the flowers of the temple
garden and under the shade of the great trees the birds of heaven flew
about unmolested.

The first of the two great cylinders of Gudea ends at this point in the
description of the temple, and it is evident that its text was composed
while the work of building was still in progress. Moreover, the writing
of the cylinder was finished before the actual work of building the
temple was completed, for the last column of the text concludes with a
prayer to Ningirsu to make it glorious during the progress of the work,
the prayer ending with the words, “O Ningirsu, glorify it! Glorify the
temple of Ningirsu during its construction!” The text of the second of
the two great cylinders is shorter than that of the first, consisting
of twenty-four instead of thirty columns of writing, and it was composed
and written after the temple was completed. Like the first of the
cylinders, it concludes with a prayer to Ningirsu on behalf of the
temple, ending with the similar refrain, “O Ningirsu, glorify it!
Glorify the temple of Ningirsu after its construction!” The first
cylinder, as we have seen, records how it came about that Gudea decided
to rebuild the temple E-ninnû in honour of Ningirsu. It describes how,
when the land was suffering from drought and famine, Gudea had a dream,
how Ninâ interpreted the dream to mean that he must rebuild the temple,
and how Ningirsu himself promised that this act of piety would restore
abundance and prosperity to the land. Its text ends with the long
description of the sumptuous manner in which the patesi carried out the
work, the most striking points of which we have just summarized. The
narrative of the second cylinder begins at the moment when the building
of the temple was finished, and when all was ready for the great god
Nin-girsu to be installed therein, and its text is taken up with a
description of the ceremonies and rites with which this solemn function
was carried out. It presents us with a picture, drawn from life, of the
worship and cult of the ancient Sumerians in actual operation. In view
of its importance from the point of view of the study and comparison of
the Sumerian and Babylonian religious systems, its contents also may be
summarized. We will afterwards discuss briefly the information furnished
by both the cylinders on the Sumerian origin of many of the religious
beliefs and practices which were current among the later Semitic
inhabitants of Babylonia and Assyria.

When Gudea had finished building the new temple of E-ninnû, and had
completed the decoration and adornment of its shrines, and had planted
its gardens and stocked its treasure-chambers and storehouses, he
applied himself to the preliminary ceremonies and religious preparations
which necessarily preceded the actual function of transferring the
statue of the god Ningirsu from his old temple to his new one. Gudea’s
first act was to install the Anunnaki, or Spirits of the Earth, in the
new temple, and when he had done this, and had supplied additional
sheep for their sacrifices and food in abundance for their offerings, he
prayed to them to give him their assistance and to pronounce a prayer at
his side when he should lead Ningirsu into his new dwelling-place.
The text then describes how Gudea went to the old temple of Ningirsu,
accompanied by his protecting spirits who walked before him and behind
him. Into the old temple he carried sumptuous offerings, and when he
had set them before the god, he addressed him in prayer and said: “O
my King, Ningirsu! O Lord, who curbest the raging waters! O Lord, whose
word surpasseth all others! O Son of Enlil, O warrior, what commands
shall I faithfully carry out? O Ningirsu, I have built thy temple, and
with joy would I lead thee therein, and my goddess Bau would install at
thy side.” We are told that the god accepted Gudea’s prayer, and thereby
he gave his consent to be removed from the old temple of E-ninnû to his
new one which bore the same name.

But the ceremony of the god’s removal was not carried out at once, for
the due time had not arrived. The year ended, and the new year came,
and then “the month of the temple” began. The third day of the month
was that appointed for the installation of Ningirsu. Gudea meanwhile had
sprinkled the ground with oil, and set out offerings of honey and butter
and wine, and grain mixed with milk, and dates, and food untouched
by fire, to serve as food for the gods; and the gods themselves had
assisted in the preparations for the reception of Ningirsu. The god
Asaru made ready the temple itself, and Ninmada performed the ceremony
of purification. The god Enki issued oracles, and the god Nindub, the
supreme priest of Eridu, brought incense. Ninâ performed chants within
the temple, and brought black sheep and holy cows to its folds and
stalls. This record of the help given by the other gods we may interpret
as meaning that the priests attached to the other great Sumerian
temples took part in the preparation of the new temple, and added their
offerings to the temple stores. To many of the gods, also, special
shrines within the temple were assigned.

When the purification of E-ninnû was completed and the way between
the old temple and the new made ready, all the inhabitants of the city
prostrated themselves on the ground. “The city,” says Gudea, “was like
the mother of a sick man who prepareth a potion for him, or like the
cattle of the plain which lie down together, or like the fierce lion,
the master of the plain, when he coucheth.” During the day and the night
before the ceremony of removal, prayers and supplications were uttered,
and at the first light of dawn on the appointed day the god Ningirsu
went into his new temple “like a whirlwind,” the goddess Bau entering
at his side “like the sun rising over Shirpurla.” She entered beside his
couch, like a faithful wife, whose cares are for her own household, and
she dwelt beside his ear and bestowed abundance upon Shirpurla.

As the day began to brighten and the sun rose, Gudea set out as
offerings in the temple a fat ox and a fat sheep, and he brought a vase
of lead and filled it with wine, which he poured out as a libation, and
he performed incantations. Then, having duly established Ningirsu and
Bau in the chief shrine, he turned his attention to the lesser gods and
installed them in their appointed places in the temple, where they would
be always ready to assist Ningirsu in the temple ceremonies and in the
issue of his decrees for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
Thus he established the god Galalim, the son of Ningirsu, in a chosen
spot in the great court in front of the temple, where, under the orders
of his father, he should direct the just and curb the evil-doer; he
would also by his presence strengthen and preserve the temple, while
his special duty was to guard the throne of destiny and, on behalf of
Ningirsu, to place the sceptre in the hands of the reigning patesi.
Near to Ningirsu and under his orders Gudea also established the god
Dunshaga, whose function it was to sanctify the temple and to look after
its libations and offerings, and to see to the due performance of the
ceremonies of ablution. This god would offer water to Ningirsu with a
pure hand, he would pour out libations of wine and strong drink, and
would tend the oxen, sheep, kids, and other offerings which were brought
to the temple night and day. To the god Lugalkurdub, who was also
installed in the temple, was assigned the privilege of holding in his
hand the mace with the seven heads, and it was his duty to open the door
of the Gate of Combat. He guarded the sacred weapons of Ningirsu and
destroyed the countries of his enemies. He was Ningirsu’s chief leader
in battle, and another god with lesser powers was associated with him as
his second leader.

Ningirsu’s counsellor was the god Lugalsisa, and he also had his
appointed place in E-ninnû. It was his duty to receive the prayers
of Shirpurla and render them propitious; he superintended and blessed
Ningirsu’s journey when he visited Eridu or returned from that city,
and he made special intercessions for the life of Gudea. The minister of
Ningirsu’s harîm was the god Shakanshabar, and he was installed near to
Nin-girsu that he might issue his commands, both great and small. The
keeper of the harîm was the god Urizu, and it was his duty to purify the
water and sanctify the grain, and he tended Ningirsu’s sleeping-chamber
and saw that all was arranged therein as was fitting. The driver of
Ningirsu’s chariot was the god Ensignun; it was his duty to keep the
sacred chariot as bright as the stars of heaven, and morning and evening
to tend and feed Ningirsu’s sacred ass, called Ug-kash, and the ass
of Eridu. The shepherd of Ningirsu’s kids was the god Enlulim, and he
tended the sacred she-goat who suckled the kids, and he guarded her so
that the serpent should not steal her milk. This god also looked
after the oil and the strong drink of E-ninnû, and saw that its store
increased.

Ningirsu’s beloved musician was the god Ushum-gabkalama, and he was
installed in E-ninnû that he might take his flute and fill the temple
court with joy. It was his privilege to play to Ningirsu as he listened
in his harîm, and to render the life of the god pleasant in E-ninnû.
Ningirsu’s singer was the god Lugaligi-khusham, and he had his appointed
place in E-ninnû, for he could appease the heart and soften anger; he
could stop the tears which flowed from weeping eyes, and could lessen
sorrow in the sighing heart. Gudea also installed in E-ninnû the seven
twin-daughters of the goddess Bau, all virgins, whom Ningirsu had
begotten. Their names were Zarzaru, Impaë, Urenuntaëa, Khegir-nuna,
Kheshaga, Gurmu, and Zarmu. Gudea installed them near their father that
they might offer favourable prayers.

The cultivator of the district of Gu-edin was the god Gishbare, and he
was installed in the temple that he might cause the great fields to be
fertile, and might make the wheat glisten in Gu-edin, the plain assigned
to Ningirsu for his revenues. It was this god’s duty also to tend the
machines for irrigation, and to raise the water into the canals and
ditches of Shirpurla, and thus to keep the city’s granaries well filled.
The god Kal was the guardian of the fishing in Gu-edin, and his chief
duty was to place fish in the sacred pools. The steward of Gu-edin was
the god Dimgalabzu, whose duty it was to keep the plain in good order,
so that the birds might abound there and the beasts might raise their
young in peace; he also guarded the special privilege, which the plain
enjoyed, of freedom from any tax levied upon the increase of the
cattle pastured there. Last of all Gudea installed in E-ninnû the god
Lugalenurua-zagakam, who looked after the construction of houses in the
city and the building of fortresses upon the city wall; in the temple it
was his privilege to raise on high a battle-axe made of cedar.

All these lesser deities, having close relations to the god Ningirsu,
were installed by Gudea in his temple in close proximity to him, that
they might be always ready to perform their special functions. But the
greater deities also had their share in the inauguration of the temple,
and of these Gudea specially mentions Ana, Enlil, Ninkharsag, Enki, and
Enzu, who all assisted in rendering the temple’s lot propitious. For at
least three of the greater gods (Ana, Enlil, and the goddess Nin-makh)
Gudea erected shrines near one another and probably within the temple’s
precincts, and, as the passage which records this fact is broken, it is
possible that the missing portion of the text recorded the building of
shrines to other deities. In any case, it is clear that the composer
of the text represents all the great gods as beholding the erection and
inauguration of Ningirsu’s new temple with favour.

After the account of the installation of Ningirsu, and his spouse Bau,
and his attendant deities, the text records the sumptuous offerings
which Gudea placed within Ningirsu’s shrine. These included another
chariot drawn by an ass, a seven-headed battle-axe, a sword with nine
emblems, a bow with terrible arrows and a quiver decorated with wild
beasts and dragons shooting out their tongues, and a bed which was
set within the god’s sleeping-chamber. On the couch in the shrine the
goddess Bau reclined beside her lord Ningirsu, and ate of the great
victims which were sacrificed in their honour.

When the ceremony of installation had been successfully performed, Gudea
rested, and for seven days he feasted with his people. During this time
the maid was the equal of her mistress, and master and servant consorted
together as friends. The powerful and the humble man lay down side by
side, and in place of evil speech only propitious words were heard. The
rich man did not wrong the orphan and the strong man did not oppress the
widow. The laws of Ninâ and Ningirsu were observed, justice was bright
in the sunlight, and the Sun-god trampled iniquity under foot. The
building of the temple also restored material prosperity to the land,
for the canals became full of water and fish swarmed in the pools, the
granaries were filled with grain and the flocks and herds brought forth
their increase. The city of Shirpurla was satiated with abundance.

Such is a summary of the account which Gudea has left us of his
rebuilding of the temple E-ninnû, of the reasons which led him to
undertake the work, and of the results which followed its completion. It
has often been said that the inscriptions of the ancient Sumerians are
without much intrinsic value, that they mainly consist of dull votive
formulæ, and that for general interest the best of them cannot be
compared with the later inscriptions of the Semitic inhabitants
of Mesopotamia. This reproach, for which until recently there was
considerable justification, has been finally removed by the working
out of the texts upon Gudea’s cylinders. For picturesque narrative, for
wealth of detail, and for striking similes, it would be hard to find
their superior in Babylonian and Assyrian literature. They are, in fact,
very remarkable compositions, and in themselves justify the claim that
the Sumerians were possessed of a literature in the proper sense of the
term.